oai:pubmedcentral.nih.gov:53593112017-04-04frontendopmc-open
Hypothalamic 2-arachidonoylglycerol regulates multistage process of high-fat diet preferences

        Although the brain is composed of numerous cell types, neurons have received the vast majority of attention in the attempt to understand how this organ functions. Neurons are indeed fundamental but, in order for them to function correctly, they rely on the surrounding “non-neuronal” cells. These different cell types, which include glia, epithelial cells, pericytes, and endothelia, supply essential substances to neurons, in addition to protecting them from dangerous substances and situations. Moreover, it is now clear that non-neuronal cells can also actively participate in determining neuronal signaling outcomes. Due to the increasing problem of obesity in industrialized countries, investigation of the central control of energy balance has greatly increased in attempts to identify new therapeutic targets. This has led to interesting advances in our understanding of how appetite and systemic metabolism are modulated by non-neuronal cells. For example, not only are nutrients and hormones transported into the brain by non-neuronal cells, but these cells can also metabolize these metabolic factors, thus modifying the signals reaching the neurons. The hypothalamus is the main integrating center of incoming metabolic and hormonal signals and interprets this information in order to control appetite and systemic metabolism. Hence, the factors transported and released from surrounding non-neuronal cells will undoubtedly influence metabolic homeostasis. This review focuses on what is known to date regarding the involvement of different cell types in the transport and metabolism of nutrients and hormones in the hypothalamus. The possible involvement of non-neuronal cells, in particular glial cells, in physiopathological outcomes of poor dietary habits and excess weight gain are also discussed.
      

        hypothalamus
        metabolism
        energy
        homeostasis
        glia
        inflammation
      

    
      Introduction
      Our understanding of the neuronal circuits controlling metabolism has advanced in recent years and progress has been made in the development of potential treatments for obesity, particularly in specific monogenic forms of obesity (1). However, the brain is not composed of neurons alone; other cell types actually outnumber these electrically excitable nerve cells and participate in and/or modulate all neuronal functions. In the hypothalamus, this includes the participation of non-neuronal cells in the modulation of neuronal circuits controlling appetite and metabolism.
      Non-neuronal cells in the central nervous system (CNS), including glia, epithelial cells, pericytes, and endothelia, perform a wide spectrum of functions throughout the brain. Many of these functions are common in each brain area, although the specific outcomes are at least in part dependent on the neuronal circuits that are affected by their actions. Moreover, within each class of non-neuronal cell type there are generalized subclassifications that, although quite incomplete, indicate diverse functional states. There are also specialized cell types found only in specific areas of the brain. One important example that will be discussed in greater detail is tanycytes, specialized glial cells found lining the third ventricle and in close proximity to the neuroendocrine hypothalamus. The fact that there is wide heterogeneity within each non-neuronal cell type has become increasingly clear; however, we currently do not have the tools available to sufficiently distinguish between these subpopulations and this has clearly hindered advances in this field.
      With the explosion in the prevalence of obesity that has occurred almost worldwide, investigation in the area of metabolic control has become a priority. This has led to an increase in our understanding of how non-neuronal cell types participate in the neuroendocrine control of appetite and energy expenditure, as well as in the response to increased weight gain and the development of secondary complications. Here, we have briefly outlined the different types of non-neuronal brain cells and some of their functions, both in general and those that are specific to the hypothalamus and metabolic circuits.
    
    
      Classification of Non-Neuronal Cells in the Brain
      
        Astroglial Cells
        Astrocytes were the first class of glial cells to be described (2) and they are also the most studied. One example of this is that a search of the word “astrocyte” in the PubMed Central database obtains approximately 48,000 results; typing “microglia” or “oligodendrocyte” receives less than 30,000 returns in either case. Astroglia are also the most abundant cell type in the CNS and were first thought to only constitute the physical and metabolic support for neuronal function (2). We now know that they are much more than just “neuron helpers” (3). Astrocytes do indeed transport nutrients and metabolic factors across the blood–brain barrier (BBB) and release them to the extracellular fluid where they can be used by neurons and other glial cells (4, 5) (Figure 1). However, it is now clear that this supply of energy substrates to other cell types is regulated with astrocytes responding to metabolic changes in order to maintain brain homeostasis (6–9). Astrocytes are also the only glial cells known to store energy through glycogenesis (10). In the synaptic cleft, they reuptake neurotransmitters and also can release gliotransmitters, forming part of what is called the “tripartite synapse” (11, 12). At the level of the BBB, astrocytes are involved in the formation and maintenance of some of the barrier properties (13) and can regulate vasodilatation, thus controlling the flow of blood-borne substances (14, 15).
        
          Figure 1
          
            Schematic representation of the blood–brain barrier. Astrocytic endfeet surround the microvessels and take up the nutrients and metabolic factors coming from the bloodstream. Endothelial cells at this level express specific receptors and transporters and restrict the passage of small molecules to the brain due to the tight junctions between them. Depending on the metabolic state, nutrients and factors are processed by astrocytes to control their access to neurons and maintain brain homeostasis.
          
          
        
        Astrocytes are connected by gap junctions in their plasma membranes, which enable direct transport of small molecules between cells. Initially, it was thought that these channels allowed passive diffusion of substances; however, the transport through gap junctions is tightly regulated (16, 17). One important function of these gap junctions is the rapid transmission of calcium waves within the glial network, resulting in a form of non-neuronal signal transmission (18).
        When employing classical labeling methods, astrocytes appear to have a star-shaped morphology, although two different forms, protoplasmic and fibrous, can be distinguished. The first are mainly found close to synapses and blood vessels, whereas the latter are frequently found within the white matter (19–21). The morphology of these glial cells also changes in respect to their functional or activational state. The fact that astrocytes differentially express certain proteins (e.g., receptors, enzymes, channels, etc.) depending on the brain area and the physiological or pathophysiological conditions to which they are subjected raises questions regarding the current definition and classification of astroglial cells (22). Growing evidence indicates that astrocytes are vastly heterogeneous (23–28). For example, Matthias and colleagues reported that within the hippocampus subsets of GFAP expressing cells expressed either glutamate transporters or glutamate receptors (23). Moreover, astrocytes throughout the brain differentially express connexins (24) and GABA and glutamate receptors (26) and different astrocyte populations are reported to differentially support developmental functions and synapse formation (28, 29). Thus, our understanding of the functions of astrocytes is advancing, but much is yet to be learned. Indeed, we are only now beginning to have the tools to understand the grand diversity of these glial cells.
      
      
        Microglia
        Microglial cells constitute the bulk of the immune system in the brain. There have been different systems suggested for the classification of microglia, with most engaging morphological features. The most general classification includes an amoeboid form, characteristic of early development, and a ramified form or “resting” microglia and reactive microglia (30–32). The phenotype of reactive microglia is defined by changes in morphology, to short and thick projections, and the release of factors like cytokines, nitric oxide, and reactive oxygen species (30, 31, 33, 34). This “activation” or change in phenotype can occur in response to brain damage, toxic substances, or injury due to harmful conditions like obesity or a high fat diet (HFD) (35, 36) and when this state is sustained, it can lead to a pathological chronic state of reactive microgliosis (37). However, the division that separates resting and reactive microglia has become more diffuse as we learn more about these cells (38).
        One of the main functions of microglia is to “clean” the CNS by phagocytosis of cellular debris, foreign matter, and other wastes (39). In this manner, they participate in development and synaptic plasticity (40–42). They can also release gliotransmitters and metabolic factors, contributing to maintain brain homeostasis (38, 43). Importantly, as part of the immune system, microglial cells respond to injury and harmful factors, including fatty acids, by releasing cytokines and to infection by presenting antigens to T-cells (35, 39, 43).
      
      
        Oligodendrocytes
        Oligodendrocyte projections wrap neuronal axons, forming the myelin sheaths in the CNS. To date, no direct link between these cells and systemic metabolic function has been verified, although some studies connecting metabolic signals with changes in myelination or oligodendrocyte survival suggest at least an indirect relationship with metabolism (44–48). However, it has been recently shown that oligodendrocyte precursors (NG2 glia) in the median eminence are important for the function of leptin receptor-expressing neurons, whose dendritic processes they contact (49).
      
      
        Tanycytes
        These specialized ependymal-like glial cells lining the ventral and ventrolateral part of the third ventricle (Figure 2) are proving to be very interesting as we know more about them. From dorsal to ventral, they are classified as subtypes α1, α2, β1, and β2. They are polarized cells: on the ventricle-side they express numerous receptors and transporters in their membrane and can be ciliated (not β2 tanycytes); and on the opposite side they present a long process that projects into the hypothalamic parenchyma or the median eminence (50). The β2 tanycytes can be found close to the median eminence, a subhypothalamic circumventricular organ. Capillaries on the median eminence are fenestrated, making the BBB permeable to many substances (50–52). The long processes of β2-tanycytes project into these fenestrated vessels, forming a blood–CSF barrier (BCSFB). The tight junctions between them, in addition to the specific transporters that they express, allow them to control the entry of many substances into the hypothalamus (53). They can also regulate the permeability of this barrier at this level of the brain, by the release of vascular endothelial growth factor-A in response to metabolic changes (54) and possibly by other mechanisms (55). Although astrocytes are the major cells expressing gap junctions, tanycytes also express these structures and can also produce calcium wave signaling (56). Tanycytes also possess stem cell properties (57) and participate in glutamate recycling (58), nutrient sensing (59, 60), and the conversion of thyroid hormones (TH) (61).
        
          Figure 2
          
            Schematic representation of tanycytes lining the third ventricle. Microvessels of the median eminence are fenestrated, so they allow water, ions, and small molecules to freely enter the brain. β2-tanycytes present tight junctions between them, forming a blood–CSF barrier. They take up nutrients and factors from the microvessels and control their access to the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and the rest of the brain. This is probably the main route for some hormones and nutrients to the hypothalamus. Also, tanycytes are communicated through gap junctions, so some molecules can be transported to lateral β1 and α-tanycytes and gain access to the arcuate nucleus and the ventromedial nucleus of the hypothalamus.
          
          
        
      
      
        Pericytes
        Pericytes are contractile cells surrounding the blood vessels (62, 63). In addition to their ability to modify blood flow due to their contractibility, brain pericytes have multiple roles in the development and maintenance of the BBB (64, 65), including macrophage-like functions and characteristics (66–68), angiogenic properties (69), and a role in neuroinflammation (70). Indeed, in response to brain injury, there is evidence that pericytes change to a microglia-like phenotype (68, 71), migrate to the brain parenchyma (72), and are involved in scar formation (73), antigen presentation (74), and the release of inflammatory factors (75, 76). Pericytes are also reported to be multipotential stem cells in the CNS (77). However, the identity of these stem cells is still a subject of controversy (78), due to the lack of reliable pericyte markers (79).
      
      
        Endothelial Cells
        Endothelial cells, along with pericytes, form the walls of the microvessels, taking part in the transport of metabolites through the BBB (80). The particularities of BBB endothelial cells, described below, allow for a strict control of the passage of substances from the blood into the CNS.
      
      
        Epithelial Cells/Ependymocytes
        In the CNS, epithelial cells can be found in the choroid plexus and lining the ventricles. They secrete the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) that fills the ventricles and factors involved in neurogenesis and brain development (81–84). Epithelial cells of the CNS also express transporters for glucose, amino acids, and other molecules (85–87), as well as receptors for hormones such as sex steroids (88–90) and leptin (91). Moreover, they form a type of BCSFB due to the tight junctions between them (92). Ependymal cells are epithelial cells lining the ventricles. Their polarized organization and beating of numerous cilia are important for the movement of CSF (93, 94). They also possess precursor properties and, together with tanycytes, form the hypothalamic neurogenic niche (95).
      
    
    
      Functions of Non-Neuronal Cells
      
        Transport of Metabolic Signals into and within the Hypothalamus
        The transport of nutrients and other metabolic signals is one of the best studied functions of non-neuronal cells in the nervous system. At the physiological level, nutrients from the diet, hormones, and other substances are delivered to all tissues through the bloodstream. However, due to its exceptional importance and vulnerability, the CNS protects its homeostasis by carefully controlling what can and cannot enter from the circulation. This function is carried out by the BBB, which is formed by specialized glia, pericytes, and endothelial cells expressing transporters, receptors, and sensors that allow them to select the information and nutrients accessing the nervous tissue (80) (Figure 1). As nutrients and metabolic signals are also found in the CSF, there is a BCSFB, formed by ependymal cells and tanycytes, in the third ventricle (50, 96, 97) (Figure 2). The distribution of tight junction proteins between tanycytes at this level is important in determining the permeability of the barrier, being lower at the median eminence, where there are fenestrated capillaries and higher next to the arcuate nucleus (98).
        The first checkpoint for any substance to cross the BBB into the CNS is the endothelial cell, the bricks forming the capillary walls (Figure 1). Endothelial cells in the BBB are phenotypically different from those of peripheral vessels and restrict the access of blood-borne substances to the extracellular fluid of the CNS (80, 99). To achieve this, these endothelial cells have tight junctions between them, reduced endocytosis, no fenestrations, and specific transporters and receptors, in addition to a large number of mitochondria (65). Thus, brain capillary endothelial cells broadly determine the barrier permeability. Surrounding these capillaries are the astrocytic endfeet, along with pericytes and microglia (Figure 1). These other cells also participate in the regulation of nutrient and hormone entry, and thus metabolic signaling, from the periphery (80, 99, 100). Astrocytes and other non-neuronal cells can detect changes in the concentrations of specific nutrients and the presence of other signals and react consequently to maintain brain homeostasis, as described below.
        
          Glucose
          Glucose, the main energy source of the CNS, enters the brain from the bloodstream crossing the BBB through specific transporters. As normal brain function depends on its glucose supply, this step is highly regulated. That is, the transport of glucose across the BBB adapts in response to cerebral energy demand in order to maintain glucose homeostasis in the brain. The facilitative glucose transporter (GLUT)-1 is largely responsible for glucose transport across the BBB. This protein is expressed in non-neuronal cells throughout the CNS, especially in astrocytes and endothelial cells of the BBB (101), as well as in tanycytes along the BCSFB (50). However, GLUT-1 in endothelial cells is highly glycosylated, having a higher molecular weight than the isoform expressed in astrocytes and other glial cells (101, 102). As indicated in a recent review, some authors suggest different functional characteristics between the two forms of GLUT-1, although there is no consensus on this subject (103).
          Changes in glucose concentration are rapidly detected in the hypothalamus, which adapts to such variations and emits a response to maintain glucose homeostasis not only in the brain, but also systemically as glucose-sensing neurons in the hypothalamus send signals to the autonomous nervous system, reaching peripheral organs such as the pancreas or the liver (104–107). There is more than one mechanism for central glucose sensing and different cell types are involved in this essential task (107–110). Two populations of glucose-sensing neurons have been identified: glucose-excited and glucose-inhibited neurons (GE and GI, respectively) (111) and glial cells also participate in these important glucose-sensing mechanisms. Astrocyte endfeet express GLUT-2 which, in addition to its transport functions, participates in glucose sensing (110, 112). This GLUT is highly expressed in tanycytes along the BCSFB (109), with these specialized glial cells also participating in glucose-sensing processes. In addition to expressing GLUT-2, astrocytes and tanycytes express sodium glucose transporter (SGLT)-1, glucokinase (GCK), and KATP channels (110), proteins that are all known to be involved in glucose-sensing mechanisms. Indeed, the classical mechanism for glucose sensing in pancreatic β-cells requires glucose uptake through GLUT-2 in rodents or GLUT-1 in humans, GCK, and activation of ATP-sensitive K+ channels (112, 113). This system shares some similarities with glucose-sensing pathways in astrocytes and tanycytes.
          One proposed model for glucose sensing in tanycytes involves glucose entering the cell through GLUT-2 and phosphorylation by GCK. Subsequently, glucose-6-phosphate undergoes glycolysis, producing pyruvate and, through the action of lactate dehydrogenase, lactate. Lactate is transported to the extracellular space by monocarboxylate transporter (MCT)-4 or MCT-1, and then taken up by neurons through MCT-2 (109). Depending on the kind of neuron, GE or GI, an excitatory or inhibitory signal will be produced in the hypothalamus and sent to other brain areas and the autonomic nervous system (108). Tanycytes can also respond rapidly to glucose and other inputs by producing calcium waves, a process requiring ATP release and autocrine signaling through purinergic P2Y receptors (56, 59). The precise mechanisms involved in this tanycytic response are not yet fully elucidated, but it constitutes a possible model for tanycyte–neuron interaction.
          Glucose sensing in astrocytes involves a similar process. Indeed, according to the “astrocyte-neuron lactate shuttle” hypothesis proposed by Pellerin and Magistretti over two decades ago (4), lactate from glucose or glycogen metabolism released by astrocytes is not only used by neurons as an energy source but can also signal energy availability to glucose-sensing neurons. Glucose transport into astrocytes is facilitated by GLUT-2 or occurs through gap junctions in a passive manner (112, 114–116). This glucose can be metabolized or stored as glycogen. However, it is still debated as to whether astrocytes secrete only lactate or also glucose to the extracellular fluid to act on glucose-sensing neurons and to be used as fuel (112). Moreover, astrocytes and tanycytes can respond to an increase in glucose or to other signals (i.e., some neurotransmitters) by secreting endozepines, anorexigenic peptides that act on hypothalamic neurons to maintain energy homeostasis (107, 117) and that also participate in unsaturated long-chain fatty acid metabolism in astrocytes (118).
          The precise mechanisms of glucose transport and sensing in the hypothalamus are yet to be fully elucidated. For example, SGLT, an active sodium co-transporter, is reported to be involved in glucose sensing in the ventromedial nucleus of the rodent hypothalamus (119), although it is not clear whether this sensing occurs in glucose responsive neurons or in astrocytes. By using genetically engineered mouse models, García-Cáceres and collaborators recently demonstrated that insulin signaling in astrocytes plays a role in the regulation of systemic glucose homeostasis. Specific ablation of the insulin receptor (IR) in astrocytes was shown to impair their uptake of glucose and the ability to correctly respond to changes in glycemia (120). Other studies suggest a role of leptin in increasing (121) or ghrelin in reducing (122) glucose uptake by astrocytes, which might also affect glucose sensing. It thus appears that the transport of glucose by astrocytes is highly regulated by diverse nutrient and hormonal signals.
        
        
          Ketone Bodies
          Monocarboxylates are molecules with one carboxylate group; some examples with metabolic functions include not only lactate, but also pyruvate and ketones, all of which can be used by neurons as an alternative energy source in addition to acting as metabolic signals (123–126). The brain expresses MCTs-1, -2, and -4, with MCT-1 being found in endothelial and ependymal cells, as well as in astrocyte endfeet at the BBB (127, 128). MCT-2 is expressed in endothelial cells, but not in astrocytes, whereas MCT-4 appears to be specific for astrocytes (58, 129–131). Ketone bodies and other monocarboxylates from the bloodstream cross the BBB through specific MCTs present in both the luminal and abluminal sides of the endothelial cells (132, 133). Astrocyte endfeet not only takes up monocarboxylates through MCT-1 (132–134), but these glial cells are also able to synthesize ketone bodies from fatty acid β-oxidation and secrete them as an energy source for neurons and other glial cells (Figure 1). Tanycytes have also been suggested to transport lactate through MCT-2 in a photoperiodic model of Siberian hamster (58). These authors found that MCT-2 and the glutamate transporter GLAST were decreased during a short photoperiod, which could indicate a change in seasonal neurotransporter supply. In the rat brain, tanycytes were shown to express functional MCT-1 and MCT-4 in an anatomically specific manner (135), suggesting that these glial cells may also participate in lactate transport to neurons.
          Regulation of the transport and production of ketone bodies in the brain is important in metabolic control as hypothalamic sensing of these monocarboxylates also participates in the regulation of food intake (126, 136). Indeed, after the initial HFD-induced hyperphagia, there is a reduction in food intake that is reported to be mediated, at least in part, by ketone body signaling to hypothalamic neurons. These ketone bodies are synthesized by hypothalamic astrocytes as products of fatty acid metabolism (136, 137).
        
        
          Lipids
          Lipid sensing in the hypothalamus is necessary for the correct regulation of energy balance (138). There are lipid sensing neurons that are excited or inhibited by fatty acids, depending on the type of neuron and also the metabolic state, i.e., fasting versus overfeeding (139). Although the role of glial cells in this process is not fully understood, astrocytes are the primary lipid metabolizers in the CNS. They also express proteins related to lipid sensing, such as transporter CD36 and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma, an important lipid-activated nuclear receptor that regulates transcription of numerous genes, including some involved in lipid metabolism (140, 141). In addition, astrocytic production of ketone bodies from fatty acids and their release to neurons could be one way by which an excess of fatty acids is signaled to metabolic neuronal circuits. Recent evidence suggests an increase in fatty acid β-oxidation in hypothalamic astrocytes from obese mice fed a HFD, as well as a role for tanycytes in restricting the passage of saturated fatty acids into the hypothalamus (142).
          Although the brain produces lipids, it also has mechanisms to transport them from the bloodstream, but how they go through the BBB is not yet fully understood. Short and medium chain fatty acids appear to enter the CNS by simple diffusion through the plasma membrane (143). In contrast, long chain fatty acids (&gt;12 carbons) need transporters to cross the BBB (144), with several fatty acid transport proteins (FATP) and fatty acid binding proteins (FABP) having been identified (145). In vitro studies indicate that FATP-1, FATP-4, and FABP-5 are the major isoforms expressed in microvessel endothelial cells and the gray matter of the human brain (145, 146). When the fatty acid translocase (FAT) CD36 is knocked-out in mice (CD36−/−), the uptake of monounsaturated fatty acids is significantly decreased, with no effect on polyunsaturated fatty acid uptake (147). In the CNS, CD36 is expressed in endothelial cells, microglial cells, astrocytes, and in ventromedial hypothalamic neurons (148–151). Although it is not the most highly expressed FATP, studies indicate that CD36 is responsible for fatty acid sensing in the hypothalamus and is thus important for the control of energy homeostasis (136, 137, 152).
          In addition to the passage of free fatty acids through the BBB, lipids can also enter or exit the CNS as lipoproteins. This process is mediated by apolipoprotein E (ApoE) interacting with lipoprotein receptors (153). In the CNS, ApoE is expressed in astrocytes and tanycytes and its levels are upregulated by both leptin and TH (154, 155), with this process being involved in the regulation of food intake and energy balance (156).
        
      
      
        Hormone Transport and Signaling
        
          Leptin
          Leptin is an anorexigenic hormone that exerts part of its effects by inhibiting orexigenic neurons and activating anorexigenic neurons in the hypothalamus (157–159). It also has a role in the regulation of systemic lipid and glucose metabolism (160, 161). The leptin (or obesity) receptor (ObR), which has six isoforms, is highly expressed in brain endothelial cells, astrocytes and tanycytes (162–165), and endothelial and astroglial cells have been studied in attempt to unravel the mechanisms of leptin transport into the brain (163, 166). However, González-Carter and colleagues have recently reported that, in a human in vitro BBB model, leptin–ObR interaction is not necessary for the transport of this hormone across the BBB. They propose that lipoprotein receptor-related protein-2, expressed in endothelial cells at the BBB, is responsible for the passage of leptin across the BBB (167). Increasing evidence points to the BCSFB as the main pathway for entry of leptin into, at least, the hypothalamus (165, 168) (Figure 2).
          The median eminence, a circumventricular organ close to the third ventricle, is the first site in the brain reached by blood-borne leptin (165). After an intraperitoneal leptin injection, there is a 1–2 h lag between the activation of leptin signaling pathways in the ventral and dorsal nuclei of the hypothalamus. This time-lag disappears when leptin is administered intracerebroventricularly, instead of intraperitoneally (169), suggesting that leptin transport from blood to the CSF is an important step in the action of this hormone in the brain and that it involves a delay in circulating changes reaching central target sites. Moreover, this process appears to be a finely regulated step in the control of energy balance as tanycytes act as “gatekeepers” for the passage of leptin into the mediobasal hypothalamus. Evidence suggests that leptin is first taken up by tanycyte processes in contact with the fenestrated capillaries at the median eminence (165) and that this uptake requires the activation of ObRb and the internalization of leptin by clathrin-coated vesicles (165). According to research carried out by Vincent Prevot and his team, this process involves signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-3, protein kinase B (PKB)/Akt, and extracellular signal regulated kinase (ERK) phosphorylation, but is janus kinase-2 independent (165). Leptin is then transported toward the tanycyte cell body and, finally, released to the CSF and hypothalamic parenchyma (Figure 2) employing an ERK-dependent pathway (165). By using STAT-3 phosphorylation as an indicator of leptin signaling (170–172), Balland and collaborators reported that neutralization of leptin in the CSF impairs leptin signaling in mediobasal hypothalamic neurons (165), supporting the idea of the blood–CSF–hypothalamic gateway for leptin entry into the brain.
          Taking into account the above mentioned studies, it appears that both endothelial cells and tanycytes contribute to the transport of leptin through the BBB and between different brain regions (163, 166, 167). In contrast, there is no clear evidence of the involvement of astrocytes in leptin transport, but a number of studies demonstrate that leptin signaling in astrocytes is important for energy homeostasis (173, 174).
          Leptin transport into the brain is modulated by conditions including obesity and fasting, as well as metabolic factors. Obesity associated to HFD intake is reported to induce central leptin resistance. There are two main mechanisms or levels of leptin resistance suggested to occur: impairment of leptin transport into the brain (165) and reduction in the central response to leptin (175). Mice exposed long term to a HFD develop leptin resistance only when high levels of plasma leptin are reached (176). This suggests that hyperleptinemia is at least one of the causes of diet-induced leptin resistance. In addition, hypothalamic inflammation associated with diet-induced obesity could contribute to leptin resistance by altering the cellular networks and molecular pathways that control energy homeostasis (177). Nevertheless, recent studies suggest that leptin resistance does not imply a loss of responsiveness to endogenous leptin, but rather that there is a threshold above which exogenous leptin barely increases the response to leptin (178, 179). Glucose and insulin are reported to increase the transport of leptin across the BBB (180), while an increase in circulating triglycerides could impair leptin transport across the BBB (181). The latter suggests a possible mechanism for the reported reduction in leptin transport into the brain during fasting (182).
        
        
          Ghrelin
          Ghrelin is an orexigenic hormone produced and secreted in the stomach (183). It has similar targets as leptin in the CNS and also plays an important, but opposite, role in energy balance (184). There are two forms of ghrelin, acylated and unacylated, depending on the post-translational acylation with octanoic or decanoic acid (183, 185). This modification occurs mainly in the stomach, but there is evidence that it can also take place in target tissues (186). The acylated form of ghrelin exerts the majority of the metabolic effects of this hormone in the CNS and it binds more efficiently to the ghrelin receptor than the unacylated form (187). This receptor, also called the growth hormone secretagogue receptor 1a, is widely expressed in the hypothalamus (188). The mechanism underlying the passage of ghrelin across the BBB is not yet fully understood, but recent studies indicate that ghrelin possibly uses a similar route as leptin into the brain (189), i.e., through tanycytes in contact with the median eminence (Figure 2). Other studies indicate that this process is carried out by saturable transporters, at least for the acylated form, whereas transport of des-acyl ghrelin is not saturable (190). Entry of acylated ghrelin into the CNS is increased by serum triglycerides and fasting and is decreased in obese mice (191), in contrast with leptin transport. Diet-induced obesity is reported to impair the hypothalamic response to peripherally or centrally administered ghrelin (192). The role of unacylated ghrelin on metabolism is largely unknown, but an increasing number of studies reveal that des-acyl ghrelin has similar and opposite functions as the acylated form (193–196).
        
        
          Insulin
          Insulin is a pancreatic hormone directly involved in glucose metabolism and homeostasis. Within the brain, it acts to increase energy expenditure and reduce food intake and energy storage (197). Insulin binds to its receptor in the plasma membranes of endothelial cells at the BBB and is internalized following a saturable pathway (198, 199). Recent studies have shown that IRs in astrocytes are involved in the entry of this hormone into the CNS (120). Also, as mentioned above, insulin signaling in astrocytes is necessary for the regulation of systemic glucose levels (120). Insulin transport into the brain is enhanced by satiation hormones like cholecystokinin (200). Although estradiol is known to impair insulin’s actions in the brain, its effects appear to be unrelated to insulin transport (201). Some studies show that leptin increases insulin sensitivity in the hypothalamus at the molecular level (202), while others have found that leptin impairs insulin signaling in the brain (203). This discrepancy could be a matter of the experimental model employed, but further research is needed to understand the relationship between the effects of leptin and insulin at the level of the CNS. Leptin shares some signaling pathways with insulin, but the effects of these two hormones are not entirely parallel, as they exert opposite effects in some hypothalamic neurons (204). Saturated fatty acids induce insulin resistance in the hypothalamus (205), as has been previously described in peripheral tissues (206).
        
        
          Sex Steroids
          As hydrophobic molecules, estrogens, androgens, and progesterone can enter the brain by simple diffusion (207). Moreover, steroids are synthesized in the brain (208). These neurosteroids are produced in the CNS either from brain-borne cholesterol or from peripherally synthesized steroid precursors, like pregnenolone, deoxycorticosterone, and testosterone (209). The enzymes necessary for this synthesis are found in non-neuronal cells, including astrocytes, tanycytes, ependymal cells, and oligodendrocytes (210, 211), and in some neurons (212). As steroid hormones are known to regulate neurosteroid metabolism in glial cells (213–217) and also the expression levels of steroid receptors in the hypothalamus (218, 219), neurosteroids could have paracrine/autocrine functions within the brain.
          Steroids and neurosteroids exert neuroprotective effects in the brain following brain injury, neurological disease, or inflammation (220–227). The expression of aromatase, the enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of testosterone into estradiol, is stimulated in reactive astrocytes after brain injury as a neuroprotective measure (228–230). Both microglial cells and astrocytes play an important role in the neuroprotective functions of steroids (231), as sex steroids diminish microglia reactivity (232–234) and astrocyte production of proinflammatory molecules (235–238).
          Sex steroids, but specially estrogens, modulate energy homeostasis at the hypothalamic level decreasing food intake (239–241), increasing energy expenditure (242), and modulating the sensitivity to other metabolic hormones (243, 244). Their effect differs depending on the neuronal population (245, 246), but with an overall anorectic effect (247–249), although the underlying mechanisms are not yet fully understood. While nuclear estrogen receptors (ERs) are involved, especially ER α (247, 250–252), evidence indicates that estrogen responsive G-coupled membrane receptors can also regulate these effects (253, 254). The apparently contradictory results in the literature regarding the mechanism of action of estrogens on metabolism indicate a complex system for estrogens’ function in energy homeostasis, where the different ERs could be acting in combination (255). Moreover, the mechanisms of action used by estrogens in metabolic control could be sexually dimorphic (256). The involvement of neurosteroids in energy homeostasis remains unknown.
        
        
          Thyroid Hormones
          The role of TH in increasing the metabolic rate has been known for more than a century (257). The involvement of these hormones in the control of energy homeostasis at the central level is a more recent discovery (258, 259). They promote lipogenesis at the level of the hypothalamus, which eventually leads to brown adipose tissue thermogenesis (259) and blockage of TH signaling in the hypothalamus reverts this process, leading to weight gain without an increase in feeding (259). Clinical studies and animal models with a pathological excess of TH synthesis and secretion (hyperthyroidism) have shed light on TH action in the hypothalamus and control of energy balance (260). Most hyperthyroid patients have an increased appetite and food intake and decreased body weight (261). Moreover, these same symptoms that are observed in animal models of hyperthyroidism are associated with the upregulation of orexigenic neuropeptides AgRP and NPY and downregulation of anorexigenic neuropeptides derived from POMC in the arcuate nucleus (259). There is evidence that TH are involved in brain inflammation, promoting survival, and processes growth in microglial cells and also in astrocytes (262–264). TH are also involved in systemic glucose homeostasis and insulin sensing (265, 266).
          The thyroid gland produces and secretes mainly tetraiodo-l-thyronine or thyroxine (T4), which is generally transformed into triiodo-l-thyronine (T3) through deiodination at the level of peripheral tissues (267). Thus, deiodinase enzyme expression in peripheral tissues is important for the control of TH actions (268), as they catalyze the transformation of T4 into T3 and of both hormones into reverse T3 (rT3) and 3,5-diiodo-l-thyronine (T2), respectively (269). These two last forms are usually considered inactive, although in the last few years new roles have been proposed for them and other non-classical TH (270).
          Thyroid hormones enter the hypothalamus mainly through MCT-8 (271) and organic anion transporting polypeptide-1C1 (272) in rodents (273). These transporters are expressed in endothelial cells of the BBB and epithelial cells of the choroid plexus (274), besides neurons and glial cells of the hypothalamus (275–277). Tanycytes act as gatekeepers for TH at the BBB (61) (Figure 2). These cells express the enzyme deiodinase II (DII) (278–280), catalyzing the formation of hormone T3 from the prohormone T4. Tanycytes uptake T4 from the capillaries and release T3 to the extracellular space in the hypothalamus, where this hormone can exert its central actions (258, 259, 281) (Figure 2). Modulation of deiodinase expression is a key point in TH homeostasis. For example, DII expression in tanycytes is promoted in fasting conditions (282). DII-expressing tanycytes are in direct contact with AgRP/NPY-expressing neurons of the arcuate nucleus. Upregulation of DII results in an increased production of T3, which activates AgRP/NPY neurons and, therefore, feeding behavior (283, 284). Tanycytes also express deiodinase III (DIII), which deiodinates T4 into reverse T3 which is biologically inactive, and T3 into T2. TH is important in the adaptation to different photoperiods in seasonal animals were, for example, there is a decrease in food intake and body weight during short photoperiods. The study of hypothalamic metabolism of TH during photoperiodic changes in seasonal mammals has shown that the there is an upregulation of DII during periods of long days, which would increase the levels of T3. In Siberian hamsters an upregulation of DIII in tanycytes has been shown to occur during short photoperiods, lowering active T3 levels (285). The retinoic acid pathway in tanycytes appears to be similarly regulated by photoperiodicity and also leads to modifications in energy expenditure (286, 287).
          Thyroid hormone signaling usually occurs through nuclear thyroid receptors α and β (288) that function as transcription factors modulating gene expression (289). TH can also exert rapid non-genomic actions through membrane-associated receptors (290, 291). This signaling pathway could mediate TH effects on vasodilatation (292) and has been shown to be involved in neuronal excitability in the hippocampus (293, 294).
          Centrally, THs control their own homeostasis in various ways, with non-neuronal cells having an important role, i.e., regulation of deiodinase expression (278) and inactivation of thyroid releasing hormone (295). Other hormones involved in metabolic control can enhance the secretion, synthesis, or sensing of TH, including leptin (296–298) and sex steroids (299–301).
        
      
      
        Metabolism of Nutrients
        
          Glucose
          Perivascular astrocytes take-up blood-borne glucose that then undergoes glycolysis or glycogenesis (112). Lactate produced from glucose or glycogen metabolism in these cells is released to the extracellular space and enters neurons to be used as energy, constituting their primary energy source as suggested by some studies (302, 303). However, the question about the identity of the main energy source for neurons—lactate or glucose—is still debated. Tanycytes can metabolize and sense glucose in a similar manner (109).
          Glucose storage as glycogen in astrocytes provides a way to guarantee energy release to neurons when it is needed, i.e., when faced with a raise in neuronal activity (304), by production of lactate from glycogenolysis. Several factors can regulate glycogen production and utilization in astrocytes, with insulin, insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1 (305, 306), and leptin (203, 307) increasing their production of glycogen. More recently, ghrelin has been reported to possibly promote glycogenolysis in hypothalamic neurons (122).
        
        
          Lipids and Ketone Bodies
          It has been suggested that some fatty acids, like erucic acid (308, 309), suffer metabolic changes as they cross the BBB, whereas others do not (310, 311). Studies indicate that lipoproteins are hydrolyzed as they cross the BBB by the enzyme lipoprotein lipase associated to the membrane of endothelial cells (312–316).
          In the absence of glucose and when glycogen stores are exhausted, such as in fasting conditions, astrocytes increase their uptake and utilization of fatty acids (136, 317, 318), which enter the mitochondria through carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1 to undergo β-oxidation (319). In the mitochondria, the enzymes 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase and lyase (320–322) transform fatty acids into β-hydroxybutyrate, a ketone body (323). Ketone bodies produced from this metabolic pathway are used by astrocytes themselves for fuel or secreted to be used by neurons and other glial cells (318).
        
      
      
        Neurogenesis
        Glial cells were first reported to participate in neurogenesis during development (324–326), but it later became apparent that they are also involved in this process in adulthood (327). In the developing hypothalamus of the rat, the birth of metabolically important neurons occurs between embryonic days 10.5 and 18.5 (328–330). Environmental changes during this period, including nutritional and hormonal disturbances, can modulate the normal process of hypothalamic neurogenesis and have an impact on later neuroendocrine function (330–332). For example, HFD intake by pregnant dams stimulates the proliferation, differentiation, and migration of orexigenic neuronal precursors and increases the density of orexigenic neurons at the level of the paraventricular nucleus in the offspring. This increase in the number and density of appetite-stimulating neurons and orexigenic neuropeptide expression leads to increased appetite, body weight, and propensity to develop obesity later in life (331).
        The clear demonstration, as well as its acceptance by the scientific community, of neurogenesis in the adult hypothalamus is relatively recent and there is still much to be learned. Tanycytes form part of the pool of neuroprogenitor cells in the hypothalamus and these precursors are capable of differentiating into not only neurons, but also astrocytes both during development and in the adult brain (333, 334). These specialized glial cells form an important neurogenic niche in the vicinity of the median eminence (333) and can proliferate and differentiate under basal conditions and when stimulated by growth factors such as IGF-1 (57, 95), fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-2 (335), FGF-10 (336, 337), or even vitamins, as tanycytes have been shown to express receptors, transporters, and other components of the vitamin A and C pathways (286, 287, 334, 338). FGF-10 positive tanycytes are reported to be important neural progenitors for NPY neurons in the arcuate nucleus, a function that may continue even during adulthood (337, 339). In addition, other isoforms of FGF are known to play a role in glucose homeostasis, inhibition of food intake, and body weight (340–343), with a possible involvement of glial cells (344–347). Although the generation of newborn neurons in the postnatal hypothalamus takes place at lower rates than during the embryonic period, it is physiologically relevant and has been shown to be regulated by diverse factors, including hormones and growth factors such as estradiol (332), FGF (335), and IGF-1 (348). Moreover, the nutritional status and dietary intake of an individual can modulate neurogenesis in hypothalamic metabolic circuits even in the adult animal (329, 333, 349–351).
        The neurons composing the hypothalamic metabolic circuits experience a turnover rate such that approximately half of these cells are reported to be replaced between 4 and 12 weeks of age in mice (329). Diet-induced obesity suppresses this remodeling, at least in part, due to a decrease in actively proliferating cells in the hypothalamus with caloric restriction reversing this effect (329). Voluntary exercise is also reported to induce hypothalamic neurogenesis (352, 353). The effect of nutrient intake on the adult hypothalamus may be anatomically specific, as diets rich in fat are reported to inhibit neurogenesis in the mediobasal hypothalamic parenchyma (333), but to promote it in the median eminence in female mice (333). The enhanced neurogenesis that occurs at the level of the median eminence is suggested to be involved in the restoration of neurons that are damaged as a consequence of HFD intake (333); hence, impedance of this process could amplify the derogatory effects of poor dietary habits. There is tantalizing data indicating that hypothalamic neurogenesis in response to HFD differs between males and females (332, 333, 354), but whether this is involved in the sexually dimorphic metabolic response to HFD and weight gain requires further investigation.
        Astrocytes are involved in the regulation of neuronal differentiation, proliferation, and synaptogenesis during development (3, 355). Microglia also actively participate in neurogenesis, both during development and adulthood, with most studies being performed in the hippocampus (356). Microglia not only phagocytize cells undergoing apoptosis in proliferative zones, but they also produce factors that can either inhibit or stimulate neuroprogenitor cells. The cross-talk between microglia and neuroprogenitor cells is an active area of investigation as this is a finely tuned process where these cells continuously interchange information (356). However, less is known regarding the role of astrocytes and microglia in neurogenesis in metabolic circuits of the adult animal.
        Diet not only affects neurogenesis in the hypothalamus, but also in other brain areas such as the hippocampus, an area known to maintain active neurogenesis even in the adult (357). In the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus, HFD intake impairs neurogenesis (358) in addition to producing oxidative stress and lipid peroxidation (357). Palmitic acid (PA), a saturated fatty acid that is a major component of the majority of HFDs, was shown to reduce the proliferation of the neuroprogenitor cells (359) and the levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor, indicating that PA-rich diets impair neurogenesis in the hippocampus. Caloric restriction and exercise increase neurogenesis in the hippocampus (350, 360, 361) and this has been associated with the anti-depressive effects of exercise (360).
      
      
        Synaptogenesis, Synaptic Plasticity, and Synaptic Transmission
        Astrocytes, in addition to participating in neuronal proliferation and differentiation, also regulate synaptogenesis during development (3, 355). In the hypothalamus, the neonatal and early prenatal hormonal and nutritional environments can affect the synaptic connectivity of metabolic circuits (189, 362). Astroglial coverage of neuronal cell surfaces has been shown to be inversely correlated with the number of synaptic inputs to their somas, with this astroglial ensheathment/synaptic input arrangement being physiologically relevant in the neuroendocrine hypothalamus (363–367). Thus, changes in astrocyte numbers or morphology in the hypothalamus might be expected to modify synaptic inputs both during development and in later life.
        The generation and maturation of astrocytes is not fully complete until the third postnatal week in rodents (368, 369), so variations in the physiological levels of specific metabolic hormones or signals during early life could affect the development of these cells. For example, neonatal overnutrition and modifications in leptin levels or signaling affect the number and morphology of astrocytes in the arcuate nucleus in adulthood (121, 173, 370). The leptin peak that takes place between postnatal days 5 and 13 in rodents is essential not only for neuronal outgrowth and maturation, but also astrogenesis (368, 371, 372) and astrocyte development (373, 374). The timing and magnitude of this leptin surge can be modified by nutrition (371, 375, 376), as well as other conditions such as stress (377) and is one mechanism by which these early environmental influences can have long-term effects on metabolism.
        Maternal dietary intake and body weight during gestation and lactation can also influence metabolic circuit formation in the offspring, including the astroglial ensheathment/synaptic input arrangement. For example, newborns from mothers fed a HFD during gestation and lactation have increased astroglial ensheathment of POMC neurons that is associated with a decrease in the resting mini inhibitory post synaptic currents of these neurons (121). The response of these POMC neurons to changes in glucose concentrations was also shown to be modified (121). Hence, alterations in the early nutritional environment could imply the modification of the appropriate development of neuron–glial interaction of metabolic circuits and therefore affect long-term metabolism.
        Microglia are involved in synaptogenesis throughout the brain (378, 379); however, there is little information regarding the specific effects of microglia on the development of the synaptic interactions of metabolic circuits. These glial cells have been shown to have an active role in the sexual differentiation of behavior and masculinization of the brain (380), suggesting that they may indeed be important for the development of endocrine circuits and possibly the sexual differentiation of some of these systems.
        Modifications in the synaptic connectivity of metabolic circuits occur in postnatal life in response to metabolic and hormonal signals (241, 381–384) and are most likely involved in the adaptation to changes in energy inputs/conditions in attempt to maintain metabolic homeostasis, with astroglia participating in these synaptic rearrangements. HFD induced-obesity is associated with an increase in the glial coverage of both POMC and NPY cell bodies in the arcuate nucleus, which is coincident with a decrease in the number of synaptic inputs to the perikarya of these neurons (384). However, there is a decline in stimulatory inputs to NPY neurons and of inhibitory inputs to POMC neurons (384), which would result in an overall decline in orexigenic signaling. When first given a HFD, rodents experience a phase of hyperphagia that is normally followed by an attenuation of this rise in energy intake. The levels of polysialic acid (PSA) are rapidly increased in the arcuate nucleus in response to HFD (385). This cell-surface glycogen can attach to cell membrane proteins to weaken cell–cell interactions and facilitate synaptic reorganization (386). If PSA is enzymatically removed from neural-cell adhesion molecule (NCAM) in the hypothalamus, HFD induced modifications in metabolic circuits can be blocked and the adaptation to HFD-induced hyperphagia attenuated (385). In addition, studies in photoperiodic models have shown that PSA and NCAM levels in tanycytes are reduced during short photoperiods in conjunction with vimentin levels, modulating the plasticity for tanycyte connections with arcuate neurons (387).
        Diverse hormonal/metabolic signals could be involved in these structural modifications, including leptin. This hormone rapidly induces synaptic changes in metabolic circuits (381), with some of these effects being mediated through astrocytes. These glial cells express different isoforms of ObR (163, 164), with the expression of this receptor being increased in astrocytes of obese rodents (163). Leptin can modify astrocyte morphology, inducing changes in the length and number of primary astrocytic projections and astroglial coverage of hypothalamic neurons (173, 388). The lack of leptin signaling due to the knock-out of this receptor in astrocytes changes synaptic inputs to POMC and NPY neurons, resulting in modifications in the function of these metabolic neurons and rendering the animals less susceptible to the effects of leptin (173). However, it remains unclear as to the mechanisms involved in the changes in neuronal/glial interactions, including identification of the initial step that triggers these morphological modifications.
        Astrocytes modulate neuronal transmission by controlling glutamate concentrations in the synaptic cleft, which also plays an important role in preventing excitotoxicity (389). Leptin and ghrelin modulate glutamate uptake by these glial cells (121, 122) and could thus affect stimulatory signaling in metabolic circuits through this mechanism. Astrocytes also actively participate in synaptic transmission and plasticity by releasing gliotransmitters, including adenosine, ATP, d-serine, glutamate, and tumor necrosis factor α that directly activate postsynaptic receptors and by altering neurotransmitter release from presynaptic neuronal elements to induce short-term plasticity and to modulate synaptic efficacy (12, 390–393). Adenosine release by astrocytes inhibits the firing rate of AgRP neurons and food intake, modifying the response to metabolic hormones such as ghrelin (394).
      
      
        Inflammatory Response
        The inflammatory response to infection, foreign substances, mechanical damage, or any situation that could damage neurons is one of the best studied functions of glial cells (231, 395–398). However, the description of hypothalamic inflammation in obesity, as well as its association with the development of secondary complications, is more recent. In 2005, the group of Licio Velloso reported that inflammatory pathways were activated in the hypothalamus in HFD-induced obese rats (399). This same group went on to demonstrate that this hypothalamic inflammation was involved in the disruption of systemic glucose homeostasis (35). Numerous studies have since reported the link between hypothalamic inflammation and obesity-related comorbidities (36, 400–404). Hypothalamic inflammation is reported to be associated with the development of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes (405) and increased cell death in the hypothalamus (329). Most studies analyzing hypothalamic inflammation have employed HFD-induced obesity models and suggest that dietary factors are involved in at least part of the inflammatory response. Indeed, hypothalamic inflammation is reported to occur even before an increase in adiposity or systemic inflammation are detected (36) and central administration of saturated fatty acids directly activates inflammatory signaling mechanisms in the hypothalamus (35, 406). However, increased weight gain can occur in response to genetic, epigenetic, and excess energy intake that is not due to increased fat consumption and the hypothalamic inflammatory/gliosis response differs depending on the underlying cause of weight gain (121, 195, 407, 408). These differential responses are most likely the result of dietary signals and the changes in metabolic signals associated to weight gain acting on both microglia and astrocytes. Sex may also be a factor, as the hypothalamic inflammatory response to chronic HFD-intake is reported to differ between males and females, with males being more susceptible (409). This could result from the greater rise in PA levels in the CNS of male mice compared to females, even though there is no sex difference in circulating fatty acid levels (410).
        Inhibition of hypothalamic inflammation is reported to blunt or block the development of obesity-associated complications (400, 403) and dietary restriction can reverse central inflammatory processes (411–415). Exercise also protects against HFD-induced hypothalamic inflammation (416).
        
          Microglia in Hypothalamic Inflammation
          Microglia, the innate immune cells of the CNS, are the first line of defense in response to foreign substances (417, 418) and are activated in response to saturated fat consumption (36, 403, 408, 419). Indeed, these glial cells are suggested to dictate the inflammation that occurs in response to saturated fats (419). Microglia can also be activated when weight gain is due to excess intake of a normal diet and due to high fat intake, (402), indicating that not only dietary signals are involved. Leptin stimulates the release of inflammatory cytokines from microglia (420), suggesting that hyperleptinemia could be involved in microglial activation in obese subjects.
        
        
          Astrocytes in Hypothalamic Inflammation
          Astrocytes also respond to HFD intake (36, 384, 421) and can be directly activated in vitro by fatty acids (408, 409, 422). Hyperleptinemia associated with weight gain may also participate in the activation of glia in situation of obesity (121, 173, 388, 408, 423). Indeed, ob/ob mice, which are dramatically obese due to the genetic lack of leptin, do not exhibit astrogliosis and leptin-induced weight loss actually increases astrocytic profiles in the hypothalamus of these animals (408). However, we have found that in some situations of increased weight gain, such as increased carbohydrate intake in the form of sucrose, astrocytic markers may actually be decreased (407).
          The astrogliosis response to HFD differs between males and females, as does the in vitro response to PA (409). The protective effects of estrogens are exerted through ERα in astrocytes (424), with estrogens protecting against PA activation of astrocytes in vitro (409). Morselli et al demonstrated that HFD-intake reduces hypothalamic ERα levels in males, but not in females, which may be involved in the decreased protection against diet-induced obesity in males.
          Astrocytes have also been implicated in determining the preference for a HFD, with this mechanism involving cannabinoid receptor 1 (CB1) (425, 426). The intake of a HFD induces the preference for this type of diet and this appears to involve the production of endocannabinoids in the hypothalamus (426). Leptin signaling in astrocytes is regulated by CB1, with disruption of CB1 in these glial cells resulting in the inability of leptin to regulate glycogen storage (307) and thus possibly affecting central energy storage and glucose sensing/signaling.
        
      
    
    
      Conclusion
      It is clear that non-neuronal cells are fundamental for the correct functioning of metabolic circuits, beginning with the essential process of regulating the nutrients and signals that reach these neurons. These cells are not only involved with the development, maintenance, and protection of their neuronal neighbors, but participate in all aspects of neuronal function (summarized in Figure 3). In the hypothalamus, numerous studies have shown how non-neuronal cells play an active role in the control of metabolism and in the pathological outcomes of poor metabolic control. Although the advances in laboratory techniques and genetically engineered animal models have increased our knowledge in this field, there is yet much to be learned regarding the mechanisms involved. Studies directed at developing markers to further identify different populations or subclasses of glial cells are of great importance in order to better understand the vast roles that these cells play in the different physiological functions controlled by the CNS. This increased knowledge will also hopefully add to our understanding of pathophysiological processes and future targets for treatments, including that of obesity and its secondary complications.
      
        Figure 3
        
          Schematic representation of the main roles of hypothalamic non-neuronal cells in metabolism. Thin arrows represent the different connections between cells: fueling and sensing of nutrients (in blue); signaling through gliotransmitters, neurotransmitters, or other factors (in green); and recycling of molecules or cleaning of cellular debris (in purple). Hormones and nutrients from the bloodstream pass through one or more types of non-neuronal cells before reaching neurons, sometimes suffering metabolic changes during the process. In response to a metabolic imbalance (excess of saturated fatty acids, hyperleptinemia, etc), microglial cells change to an activated state, releasing inflammatory factors, such as cytokines, and activating astrocytes as a neuroprotective measure. If the insult continues, it can lead to gliosis, hypothalamic inflammation, and neuronal damage.
        
        
      
    
    
      Author Contributions
      All authors have contributed to the writing and editing of this review. Figures were designed and made by AF-R.
    
    
      Conflict of Interest Statement
      The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
    
  

    
      Authors want to acknowledge Servier Medical Art for their PowerPoint image bank, which has been used as a source for the elaboration of the figures on this manuscript.
    
    
      Funding
      The authors are funded by grants from the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation (BFU2014-51836-C2-2 to JAC and BFU2014-51836-C2-1 to LG-S), Spanish Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports (university training grant FPU13/00909 to AF-R), Fondo de Investigación Sanitaria (PI-1302195, PI-1600485, and CIBEROBN to JA and CIBERFES to LG-S) and Fondos FEDER.
    
    
      References
      
        1
        FarooqiISJebbSALangmackGLawrenceECheethamCHPrenticeAM
Effects of recombinant leptin therapy in a child with congenital leptin deficiency. N Engl J Med (1999) 341(12):879–84.10.1056/NEJM19990916341120410486419
      
      
        2
        YoungJZ
The concept of neuroglia. Ann NY Acad Sci (1991) 633(1):1–18.10.1111/j.1749-6632.1991.tb15590.x
      
      
        3
        NedergaardMRansomBGoldmanSA. New roles for astrocytes: redefining the functional architecture of the brain. Trends Neurosci (2003) 26(10):523–30.10.1016/j.tins.2003.08.00814522144
      
      
        4
        PellerinLMagistrettiPJ. Glutamate uptake into astrocytes stimulates aerobic glycolysis: a mechanism coupling neuronal activity to glucose utilization. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1994) 91(22):10625–9.10.1073/pnas.91.22.106257938003
      
      
        5
        AbbottNJRonnbackLHanssonE. Astrocyte-endothelial interactions at the blood–brain barrier. Nat Rev Neurosci (2006) 7(1):41–53.10.1038/nrn182416371949
      
      
        6
        SofroniewMVVintersHV
Astrocytes: biology and pathology. Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119(1):7–35.10.1007/s00401-009-0619-820012068
      
      
        7
        BélangerMAllamanIMagistrettiPJ. Brain energy metabolism: focus on astrocyte–neuron metabolic cooperation. Cell Metab (2011) 14(6):724–38.10.1016/j.cmet.2011.08.01622152301
      
      
        8
        ParpuraVHenekaMTMontanaVOlietSHRSchousboeAHaydonPG
Glial cells in (patho)physiology. J Neurochem (2012) 121(1):4–27.10.1111/j.1471-4159.2012.07664.x22251135
      
      
        9
        TeschemacherAGGourineAVKasparovS. A role for astrocytes in sensing the brain microenvironment and neuro-metabolic integration. Neurochem Res (2015) 40(12):2386–93.10.1007/s11064-015-1562-925837670
      
      
        10
        CataldoAMBroadwellRD. Cytochemical identification of cerebral glycogen and glucose-6-phosphatase activity under normal and experimental conditions. II. Choroid plexus and ependymal epithelia, endothelia and pericytes. J Neurocytol (1986) 15(4):511–24.10.1007/BF016117333018177
      
      
        11
        AraqueAParpuraVSanzgiriRPHaydonPG. Tripartite synapses: glia, the unacknowledged partner. Trends Neurosci (1999) 22(5):208–15.10.1016/S0166-2236(98)01349-610322493
      
      
        12
        PereaGNavarreteMAraqueA. Tripartite synapses: astrocytes process and control synaptic information. Trends Neurosci (2009) 32(8):421–31.10.1016/j.tins.2009.05.00119615761
      
      
        13
        JanzerRCRaffMC. Astrocytes induce blood–brain barrier properties in endothelial cells. Nature (1987) 325(6101):253–7.10.1038/325253a03543687
      
      
        14
        ZontaMAnguloMCGobboSRosengartenBHossmannKAPozzanT
Neuron-to-astrocyte signaling is central to the dynamic control of brain microcirculation. Nat Neurosci (2003) 6(1):43–50.10.1038/nn98012469126
      
      
        15
        MacVicarBANewmanEA. Astrocyte regulation of blood flow in the brain. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol (2015) 7(5):a020388.10.1101/cshperspect.a02038825818565
      
      
        16
        SöhlGWilleckeK. Gap junctions and the connexin protein family. Cardiovasc Res (2004) 62(2):228–32.10.1016/j.cardiores.2003.11.01315094343
      
      
        17
        TheisMSöhlGEibergerJWilleckeK. Emerging complexities in identity and function of glial connexins. Trends Neurosci (2005) 28(4):188–95.10.1016/j.tins.2005.02.00615808353
      
      
        18
        ScemesEGiaumeC. Astrocyte calcium waves: what they are and what they do. Glia (2006) 54(7):716–25.10.1002/glia.2037417006900
      
      
        19
        Ramón y CajalS
Textura Del Sistema Nervioso Del Hombre y De Los Vertebrados. Madrid: Nicolás Moya (1899).
      
      
        20
        MillerRHRaffMC. Fibrous and protoplasmic astrocytes are biochemically and developmentally distinct. J Neurosci (1984) 4(2):585.6366155
      
      
        21
        PrivatARataboulP
Fibrous and protoplasmic astrocytes. In: FederoffSVernadakisA, editors. Astrocytes. Development, Morphology, and Regional Specialization of Astrocytes. Orlando, FL: Academic Press (2007). p. 105–29.
      
      
        22
        HuXYuanYWangDSuZ. Heterogeneous astrocytes: active players in CNS. Brain Res Bull (2016) 125:1–18.10.1016/j.brainresbull.2016.03.01727021168
      
      
        23
        MatthiasKKirchhoffFSeifertGHüttmannKMatyashMKettenmannH
Segregated expression of AMPA-type glutamate receptors and glutamate transporters defines distinct astrocyte populations in the mouse hippocampus. J Neurosci (2003) 23(5):1750–8.12629179
      
      
        24
        DegenJDublinPZhangJDobrowolskiRJokwitzMKarramK
Dual reporter approaches for identification of Cre efficacy and astrocyte heterogeneity. FASEB J (2012) 26(11):4576–83.10.1096/fj.12-20718322859373
      
      
        25
        RusnakovaVHonsaPDzambaDStåhlbergAKubistaMAnderovaM
Heterogeneity of astrocytes: from development to injury—single cell gene expression. PLoS One (2013) 8(8):e6973410.1371/journal.pone.006973423940528
      
      
        26
        HöftSGriemsmannSSeifertGSteinhäuserC. Heterogeneity in expression of functional ionotropic glutamate and GABA receptors in astrocytes across brain regions: insights from the thalamus. Philos Trans R Soc B Biol Sci (2014) 369(1654):20130602.10.1098/rstb.2013.060225225096
      
      
        27
        SosunovAAWuXTsankovaNMGuilfoyleEMcKhannGMGoldmanJE. Phenotypic heterogeneity and plasticity of isocortical and hippocampal astrocytes in the human brain. J Neurosci (2014) 34(6):2285–98.10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4037-13.201424501367
      
      
        28
        John LinCCYuKHatcherAHuangTWLeeHKCarlsonJ
Identification of diverse astrocyte populations and their malignant analogs. Nat Neurosci (2017) 20(3):396–405.10.1038/nn.449328166219
      
      
        29
        BuosiASMatiasIAraujoAPBBatistaCGomesFCA. Heterogeneity in synaptogenic profile of astrocytes from different brain regions. Mol Neurobiol (2017):1–12.10.1007/s12035-016-0343-z26708209
      
      
        30
        LingEAPenneyDLeblondCP
Use of carbon labeling to demonstrate the role of blood monocytes as precursors of the ‘ameboid cells’ present in the corpus callosum of postnatal rats. J Comp Neurol (1980) 193(3):631–57.10.1002/cne.9019303046969268
      
      
        31
        DalmauIFinsenBTønderNZimmerJGonzálezBCastellanoB. Development of microglia in the prenatal rat hippocampus. J Comp Neurol (1997) 377(1):70–84.10.1002/(SICI)1096-9861(19970106)377:1&lt;70:AID-CNE7&gt;3.0.CO;2-G8986873
      
      
        32
        GinhouxFLimSHoeffelGLowDHuberT
Origin and differentiation of microglia. Front Cell Neurosci (2013) 7:4510.3389/fncel.2013.0004523616747
      
      
        33
        DelgadoRCarlinAAiraghiLDemitriMTMedaLGalimbertiD
Melanocortin peptides inhibit production of proinflammatory cytokines and nitric oxide by activated microglia. J Leukoc Biol (1998) 63(6):740–5.9620667
      
      
        34
        GonçalvesJRibeiroCFMalvaJOSilvaAP
Protective role of neuropeptide Y Y2 receptors in cell death and microglial response following methamphetamine injury. Eur J Neurosci (2012) 36(9):3173–83.10.1111/j.1460-9568.2012.08232.x22805317
      
      
        35
        MilanskiMDegasperiGCoopeAMorariJDenisRCintraDE
Saturated fatty acids produce an inflammatory response predominantly through the activation of TLR4 signaling in hypothalamus: implications for the pathogenesis of obesity. J Neurosci (2009) 29(2):359–70.10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2760-08.200919144836
      
      
        36
        ThalerJPYiCXSchurEAGuyenetSJHwangBHDietrichMO
Obesity is associated with hypothalamic injury in rodents and humans. J Clin Invest (2012) 122(1):153–62.10.1172/JCI5966022201683
      
      
        37
        BlockMLHongJS. Chronic microglial activation and progressive dopaminergic neurotoxicity. Biochem Soc Trans (2007) 35(5):1127–32.10.1042/BST035112717956294
      
      
        38
        GertigUHanischUK. Microglial diversity by responses and responders. Front Cell Neurosci (2014) 8:101.10.3389/fncel.2014.0010124744702
      
      
        39
        AloisiF. Immune function of microglia. Glia (2001) 36(2):165–79.10.1002/glia.110611596125
      
      
        40
        BatchelorPELiberatoreGTWongJYFPorrittMJFrerichsFDonnanGA
Activated macrophages and microglia induce dopaminergic sprouting in the injured striatum and express brain-derived neurotrophic factor and glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor. J Neurosci (1999) 19(5):1708–16.10024357
      
      
        41
        BatchelorPEPorrittMJMartinelloPParishCLLiberatoreGTDonnanGA
Macrophages and microglia produce local trophic gradients that stimulate axonal sprouting toward but not beyond the wound edge. Mol Cell Neurosci (2002) 21(3):436–53.10.1006/mcne.2002.118512498785
      
      
        42
        ZhongYZhouLJRenWJXinWJLiYYZhangT
The direction of synaptic plasticity mediated by C-fibers in spinal dorsal horn is decided by Src-family kinases in microglia: the role of tumor necrosis factor-α. Brain Behav Immun (2010) 24(6):874–80.10.1016/j.bbi.2010.01.00720116424
      
      
        43
        ElkabesSDiCicco-BloomEMBlackIB. Brain microglia/macrophages express neurotrophins that selectively regulate microglial proliferation and function. J Neurosci (1996) 16(8):2508–21.8786427
      
      
        44
        HashimotoRUdagawaJKagohashiYMatsumotoAHattaTOtaniH. Direct and indirect effects of neuropeptide Y and neurotrophin 3 on myelination in the neonatal brains. Brain Res (2011) 1373:55–66.10.1016/j.brainres.2010.12.02721167823
      
      
        45
        AmaralAIMeisingsetTWKotterMRSonnewaldU. Metabolic aspects of neuron-oligodendrocyte-astrocyte interactions. Front Endocrinol (2013) 4:54.10.3389/fendo.2013.0005423717302
      
      
        46
        HashimotoRMatsumotoAUdagawaJHiokiKOtaniH. Effect of leptin administration on myelination in ob/ob mouse cerebrum after birth. Neuroreport (2013) 24(1):22–9.10.1097/WNR.0b013e32835ba87523196413
      
      
        47
        LeeJYYuneTY. Ghrelin inhibits oligodendrocyte cell death by attenuating microglial activation. Endocrinol Metab (Seoul) (2014) 29(3):371–8.10.3803/EnM.2014.29.3.37125309797
      
      
        48
        PeferoenLKippMValkPNoortJMAmorS. Oligodendrocyte-microglia cross-talk in the central nervous system. Immunology (2014) 141(3):302–13.10.1111/imm.1216323981039
      
      
        49
        DjogoTRobinsSCSchneiderSKryzskayaDLiuXMingayA
Adult NG2-glia are required for median eminence-mediated leptin sensing and body weight control. Cell Metab (2016) 23(5):797–810.10.1016/j.cmet.2016.04.01327166944
      
      
        50
        RodriguezEMBlazquezJLPastorFEPelaezBPeñaPPeruzzoB
Hypothalamic tanycytes: a key component of brain–endocrine interaction. Int Rev Cytol (2005) 247:89–164.10.1016/S0074-7696(05)47003-516344112
      
      
        51
        CiofiPGarretMLapirotOLafonPLoyensAPrevotV
Brain–endocrine interactions: a microvascular route in the mediobasal hypothalamus. Endocrinology (2009) 150(12):5509–19.10.1210/en.2009-058419837874
      
      
        52
        MiyataS. New aspects in fenestrated capillary and tissue dynamics in the sensory circumventricular organs of adult brains. Front Neurosci (2015) 9:390.10.3389/fnins.2015.0039026578857
      
      
        53
        LangletFMullierABouretSGPrevotVDehouckB
Tanycyte-like cells form a blood–cerebrospinal fluid barrier in the circumventricular organs of the mouse brain. J Comp Neurol (2013) 521(15):3389–405.10.1002/cne.2335523649873
      
      
        54
        LangletFLevinBELuquetSMazzoneMMessinaADunn-MeynellAA
Tanycytic VEGF-A boosts blood–hypothalamus barrier plasticity and access of metabolic signals to the arcuate nucleus in response to fasting. Cell Metab (2013) 17(4):607–17.10.1016/j.cmet.2013.03.00423562080
      
      
        55
        LangletF. Tanycytes: a gateway to the metabolic hypothalamus. J Neuroendocrinol (2014) 26(11):753–60.10.1111/jne.1219125131689
      
      
        56
        OrellanaJASáezPJCortés-CamposCElizondoRJShojiKFContreras-DuarteS
Glucose increases intracellular free Ca(2+) in tanycytes via ATP released through connexin 43 hemichannels. Glia (2012) 60(1):53–68.10.1002/glia.2124621987367
      
      
        57
        Rojczyk-GołębiewskaEPałaszAWiaderkiewiczR. Hypothalamic subependymal niche: a novel site of the adult neurogenesis. Cell Mol Neurobiol (2014) 34(5):631–42.10.1007/s10571-014-0058-524744125
      
      
        58
        NilaweeraKHerwigABolboreaMCampbellGMayerCDMorganPJ
Photoperiodic regulation of glycogen metabolism, glycolysis, and glutamine synthesis in tanycytes of the Siberian hamster suggests novel roles of tanycytes in hypothalamic function. Glia (2011) 59(11):1695–705.10.1002/glia.2121621769945
      
      
        59
        FraylingCBrittonRDaleN. ATP-mediated glucosensing by hypothalamic tanycytes. J Physiol (2011) 589(9):2275–86.10.1113/jphysiol.2010.20205121486800
      
      
        60
        BolboreaMDaleN
Hypothalamic tanycytes: potential roles in the control of feeding and energy balance. Trends Neurosci (2013) 36(2):91–100.10.1016/j.tins.2012.12.00823332797
      
      
        61
        BarrettPEblingFJPSchuhlerSWilsonDRossAWWarnerA
Hypothalamic thyroid hormone catabolism acts as a gatekeeper for the seasonal control of body weight and reproduction. Endocrinology (2007) 148(8):3608–17.10.1210/en.2007-031617478556
      
      
        62
        RougetC
Note sur le developpement de la tunique contractile des vaisseaux. C R Acad Sci (1874) 79:559–62.
      
      
        63
        DoreSE
On the contractility and nervous supply of the capillaries. Br J Dermatol (1923) 35(11):398–404.10.1111/j.1365-2133.1923.tb09069.x
      
      
        64
        ArmulikAGenoveGMaeMNisanciogluMHWallgardENiaudetC
Pericytes regulate the blood–brain barrier. Nature (2010) 468(7323):557–61.10.1038/nature0952220944627
      
      
        65
        DalviSOnNNguyenHPogorzelecMMillerDWHatchGM
The blood–brain-barrier: regulation of fatty acid and drug transport. In: HeinbockelDT, editor. Neurochemistry. InTech (2014). Available from: http://www.intechopen.com/books/neurochemistry/the-blood-brain-barrier-regulation-of-fatty-acid-and-drug-transport
      
      
        66
        BalabanovRWashingtonRWagnerovaJDore-DuffyP
CNS microvascular pericytes express macrophage-like function, cell surface integrin αM, and macrophage marker ED-2. Microvasc Res (1996) 52(2):127–42.10.1006/mvre.1996.00498901442
      
      
        67
        ThomasWE. Brain macrophages: on the role of pericytes and perivascular cells. Brain Res Brain Res Rev (1999) 31(1):42–57.10.1016/S0165-0173(99)00024-710611494
      
      
        68
        GuilleminGJBrewBJ. Microglia, macrophages, perivascular macrophages, and pericytes: a review of function and identification. J Leukoc Biol (2004) 75(3):388–97.10.1189/jlb.030311414612429
      
      
        69
        WatanabeSMorisakiNTezukaMFukudaKUedaSKoyamaN
Cultured retinal pericytes stimulate in vitro angiogenesis of endothelial cells through secretion of a fibroblast growth factor-like molecule. Atherosclerosis (1997) 130(1–2):101–7.10.1016/S0021-9150(96)06050-99126653
      
      
        70
        JanssonDRustenhovenJFengSHurleyDOldfieldRLBerginPS
A role for human brain pericytes in neuroinflammation. J Neuroinflammation (2014) 11:104–104.10.1186/1742-2094-11-10424920309
      
      
        71
        ÖzenIDeierborgTMiharadaKPadelTEnglundEGenovéG
Brain pericytes acquire a microglial phenotype after stroke. Acta Neuropathol (2014) 128(3):381–96.10.1007/s00401-014-1295-x24848101
      
      
        72
        Dore-DuffyPOwenCBalabanovRMurphySBeaumontTRafolsJA. Pericyte migration from the vascular wall in response to traumatic brain injury. Microvasc Res (2000) 60(1):55–69.10.1006/mvre.2000.224410873515
      
      
        73
        GöritzCDiasDOTomilinNBarbacidMShupliakovOFrisénJ
A pericyte origin of spinal cord scar tissue. Science (2011) 333(6039):23810.1126/science.120316521737741
      
      
        74
        BalabanovRBeaumontTDore-DuffyP. Role of central nervous system microvascular pericytes in activation of antigen-primed splenic T-lymphocytes. J Neurosci Res (1999) 55(5):578–87.10.1002/(SICI)1097-4547(19990301)55:5&lt;578:AID-JNR5&gt;3.0.CO;2-E10082080
      
      
        75
        KovacAEricksonMABanksWA. Brain microvascular pericytes are immunoactive in culture: cytokine, chemokine, nitric oxide, and LRP-1 expression in response to lipopolysaccharide. J Neuroinflammation (2011) 8:139–139.10.1186/1742-2094-8-13921995440
      
      
        76
        AlcendorDJCharestAMZhuWQVigilHEKnobelSM. Infection and upregulation of proinflammatory cytokines in human brain vascular pericytes by human cytomegalovirus. J Neuroinflammation (2012) 9:95.10.1186/1742-2094-9-9522607552
      
      
        77
        Dore-DuffyPKatychevAWangXVan BurenE. CNS microvascular pericytes exhibit multipotential stem cell activity. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab (2006) 26(5):613–24.10.1038/sj.jcbfm.960027216421511
      
      
        78
        SouzaLEMaltaTMKashima HaddadSCovasDT
Mesenchymal stem cells and pericytes: to what extent are they related?
Stem Cells Dev (2016) 25(24):1843–52.10.1089/scd.2016.010927702398
      
      
        79
        ArmulikAGenovéGBetsholtzC. Pericytes: developmental, physiological, and pathological perspectives, problems, and promises. Dev Cell (2011) 21(2):193–215.10.1016/j.devcel.2011.07.00121839917
      
      
        80
        AbbottNJPatabendigeAADolmanDEYusofSRBegleyDJ
Structure and function of the blood–brain barrier. Neurobiol Dis (2010) 37(1):13–25.10.1016/j.nbd.2009.07.03019664713
      
      
        81
        ThouvenotELafon-CazalMDemettreEJouinPBockaertJMarinP. The proteomic analysis of mouse choroid plexus secretome reveals a high protein secretion capacity of choroidal epithelial cells. Proteomics (2006) 6(22):5941–52.10.1002/pmic.20060009617051638
      
      
        82
        ParadaCGatoABuenoD. All-trans retinol and retinol-binding protein from embryonic cerebrospinal fluid exhibit dynamic behaviour during early central nervous system development. Neuroreport (2008) 19(9):945–50.10.1097/WNR.0b013e3283021c9418520998
      
      
        83
        LehtinenMKZappaterraMWChenXYangYJHillALunM
The cerebrospinal fluid provides a proliferative niche for neural progenitor cells. Neuron (2011) 69(5):893–905.10.1016/j.neuron.2011.01.02321382550
      
      
        84
        MarquesFSousaJCCoppolaGGaoFPugaRBrentaniH
Transcriptome signature of the adult mouse choroid plexus. Fluids Barriers CNS (2011) 8:10–10.10.1186/2045-8118-8-1021349147
      
      
        85
        SpectorR
Micronutrient homeostasis in mammalian brain and cerebrospinal fluid. J Neurochem (1989) 53(6):1667–74.10.1111/j.1471-4159.1989.tb09229.x2681535
      
      
        86
        SpectorRJohansonCE. Micronutrient and urate transport in choroid plexus and kidney: implications for drug therapy. Pharm Res (2006) 23(11):2515–24.10.1007/s11095-006-9091-517048121
      
      
        87
        SaundersNRDziegielewskaKMMøllgårdKHabgoodMDWakefieldMJLindsayH
Influx mechanisms in the embryonic and adult rat choroid plexus: a transcriptome study. Front Neurosci (2015) 9:123.10.3389/fnins.2015.0012325972776
      
      
        88
        Hong-GokaBCChangFF
Estrogen receptors α and β in choroid plexus epithelial cells in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurosci Lett (2004) 360(3):113–6.10.1016/j.neulet.2004.01.07515082146
      
      
        89
        QuadrosPSPfauJLWagnerCK. Distribution of progesterone receptor immunoreactivity in the fetal and neonatal rat forebrain. J Comp Neurol (2007) 504(1):42–56.10.1002/cne.2142717614295
      
      
        90
        AlvesCHGonçalvesISocorroSBaltazarGQuintelaTSantosCRA
Androgen receptor is expressed in murine choroid plexus and downregulated by 5α-dihydrotestosterone in male and female mice. J Mol Neurosci (2009) 38(1):41–9.10.1007/s12031-008-9157-419015999
      
      
        91
        MitchellSENogueirasRMorrisATovarSGrantCCruickshankM
Leptin receptor gene expression and number in the brain are regulated by leptin level and nutritional status. J Physiol (2009) 587(14):3573–85.10.1113/jphysiol.2009.17332819491239
      
      
        92
        WolburgHPaulusW. Choroid plexus: biology and pathology. Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119(1):75–88.10.1007/s00401-009-0627-820033190
      
      
        93
        Del BigioMR
Ependymal cells: biology and pathology. Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119(1):55–73.10.1007/s00401-009-0624-y20024659
      
      
        94
        OhataSAlvarez-BuyllaA. Planar organization of multiciliated ependymal (E1) cells in the brain ventricular epithelium. Trends Neurosci (2016) 39(8):543–51.10.1016/j.tins.2016.05.00427311928
      
      
        95
        MirzadehZMerkleFTSoriano-NavarroMGarcia-VerdugoJMAlvarez-BuyllaA. Neural stem cells confer unique pinwheel architecture to the ventricular surface in neurogenic regions of the adult brain. Cell Stem Cell (2008) 3(3):265–78.10.1016/j.stem.2008.07.00418786414
      
      
        96
        JohansonCEStopaEGMcMillanPN
The blood–cerebrospinal fluid barrier: structure and functional significance. In: NagS, editor. The Blood–Brain and Other Neural Barriers: Reviews and Protocols. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press (2011). p. 101–31.
      
      
        97
        BrinkerTStopaEMorrisonJKlingeP. A new look at cerebrospinal fluid circulation. Fluids Barriers CNS (2014) 11:10–10.10.1186/2045-8118-11-1024817998
      
      
        98
        MullierABouretSGPrevotVDehouckB. Differential distribution of tight junction proteins suggests a role for tanycytes in blood-hypothalamus barrier regulation in the adult mouse brain. J Comp Neurol (2010) 518(7):943–62.10.1002/cne.2227320127760
      
      
        99
        AlvarezJIKatayamaTPratA
Glial influence on the blood–brain barrier. Glia (2013) 61(12):1939–58.10.1002/glia.2257524123158
      
      
        100
        HamplRBicikovaMSosvorovaL. Hormones and the blood–brain barrier. Horm Mol Biol Clin Investig (2015) 21(3):159–64.10.1515/hmbci-2014-004225719333
      
      
        101
        MorgelloSUsonRRSchwartzEJHaberRS. The human blood–brain barrier glucose transporter (GLUT1) is a glucose transporter of gray matter astrocytes. Glia (1995) 14(1):43–54.10.1002/glia.4401401077615345
      
      
        102
        SivitzWDesautelSWalkerPSPessinJE
Regulation of the glucose transporter in developing rat brain. Endocrinology (1989) 124(4):1875–80.10.1210/endo-124-4-18752924729
      
      
        103
        PatchingSG
Glucose transporters at the blood–brain barrier: function, regulation and gateways for drug delivery. Mol Neurobiol (2016) 54(2):1046–77.10.1007/s12035-015-9672-626801191
      
      
        104
        BorgWPSherwinRSDuringMJBorgMAShulmanGI. Local ventromedial hypothalamus glucopenia triggers counterregulatory hormone release. Diabetes (1995) 44(2):180.10.2337/diab.44.2.1807859938
      
      
        105
        BorgMASherwinRSBorgWPTamborlaneWVShulmanGI. Local ventromedial hypothalamus glucose perfusion blocks counterregulation during systemic hypoglycemia in awake rats. J Clin Invest (1997) 99(2):361–5.10.1172/JCI1191659006005
      
      
        106
        LamTKGutierrez-JuarezRPocaiARossettiL. Regulation of blood glucose by hypothalamic pyruvate metabolism. Science (2005) 309(5736):943.10.1126/science.111208516081739
      
      
        107
        TononMCLanfrayDCastelHVaudryHMorinF. Hypothalamic glucose-sensing: role of glia-to-neuron signaling. Horm Metab Res (2013) 45(13):955–9.10.1055/s-0033-135535724062091
      
      
        108
        RouthVHHaoLSantiagoAMShengZZhouC. Hypothalamic glucose sensing: making ends meet. Front Syst Neurosci (2014) 8:236.10.3389/fnsys.2014.0023625540613
      
      
        109
        Elizondo-VegaRCortes-CamposCBarahonaMJOyarceKACarrilCAGarcia-RoblesMA
The role of tanycytes in hypothalamic glucosensing. J Cell Mol Med (2015) 19(7):1471–82.10.1111/jcmm.1259026081217
      
      
        110
        SteinbuschLLabouebeGThorensB. Brain glucose sensing in homeostatic and hedonic regulation. Trends Endocrinol Metab (2015) 26(9):455–66.10.1016/j.tem.2015.06.00526163755
      
      
        111
        SongZLevinBEMcArdleJJBakhosNRouthVH. Convergence of pre- and postsynaptic influences on glucosensing neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus. Diabetes (2001) 50(12):2673–81.10.2337/diabetes.50.12.267311723049
      
      
        112
        LeloupCAllardCCarneiroLFioramontiXCollinsSPenicaudL. Glucose and hypothalamic astrocytes: more than a fueling role?
Neuroscience (2016) 323:110–20.10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.06.00726071958
      
      
        113
        SchuitFCHuypensPHeimbergHPipeleersDG
Glucose sensing in pancreatic β-cells: a model for the study of other glucose-regulated cells in gut, pancreas, and hypothalamus. Diabetes (2001) 50(1):1–11.10.2337/diabetes.50.1.1
      
      
        114
        LeloupCOroscoMSerradasPNicolaïdisSPénicaudL
Specific inhibition of GLUT2 in arcuate nucleus by antisense oligonucleotides suppresses nervous control of insulin secretion. Brain Res Mol Brain Res (1998) 57(2):275–80.10.1016/S0169-328X(98)00097-79675426
      
      
        115
        MartyNDallaportaMForetzMEmeryMTarussioDBadyI
Regulation of glucagon secretion by glucose transporter type 2 (glut2) and astrocyte-dependent glucose sensors. J Clin Invest (2005) 115(12):3545–53.10.1172/JCI2630916322792
      
      
        116
        HarrisAL. Connexin channel permeability to cytoplasmic molecules. Prog Biophys Mol Biol (2007) 94(1–2):120–43.10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2007.03.01117470375
      
      
        117
        LanfrayDArthaudSOuelletJCompereVDo RegoJLLeprinceJ
Gliotransmission and brain glucose sensing: critical role of endozepines. Diabetes (2013) 62(3):801–10.10.2337/db11-078523160530
      
      
        118
        BouyakdanKTaïbBBudryLZhaoSRodarosDNeessD
A novel role for central ACBP/DBI as a regulator of long-chain fatty acid metabolism in astrocytes. J Neurochem (2015) 133(2):253–65.10.1111/jnc.1303525598214
      
      
        119
        FanXChanODingYZhuWMastaitisJSherwinR. Reduction in SGLT1 mRNA expression in the ventromedial hypothalamus improves the counterregulatory responses to hypoglycemia in recurrently hypoglycemic and diabetic rats. Diabetes (2015) 64(10):3564–72.10.2337/db15-002226130763
      
      
        120
        García-CáceresCQuartaCVarelaLGaoYGruberTLegutkoB
Astrocytic insulin signaling couples brain glucose uptake with nutrient availability. Cell (2016) 166(4):867–80.10.1016/j.cell.2016.07.02827518562
      
      
        121
        Fuente-MartinEGarcía-CáceresCGranadoMde CeballosMLSanchez-GarridoMASarmanB
Leptin regulates glutamate and glucose transporters in hypothalamic astrocytes. J Clin Invest (2012) 122(11):3900–13.10.1172/JCI6410223064363
      
      
        122
        Fuente-MartinEGarcía-CáceresCArgente-ArizonPDiazFGranadoMFreire-RegatilloA
Ghrelin regulates glucose and glutamate transporters in hypothalamic astrocytes. Sci Rep (2016) 6:23673.10.1038/srep2367327026049
      
      
        123
        Bouzier-SoreAKMerleMMagistrettiPJPellerinL. Feeding active neurons: (re)emergence of a nursing role for astrocytes. J Physiol Paris (2002) 96(3–4):273–82.10.1016/S0928-4257(02)00016-512445906
      
      
        124
        PellerinL
Lactate as a pivotal element in neuron–glia metabolic cooperation. Neurochem Int (2003) 43(4–5):331–8.10.1016/S0197-0186(03)00020-212742077
      
      
        125
        KokorovicACheungGWRossettiLLamTK. Hypothalamic sensing of circulating lactate regulates glucose production. J Cell Mol Med (2009) 13(11–12):4403–8.10.1111/j.1582-4934.2008.00596.x19040414
      
      
        126
        CarneiroLGellerSFioramontiXHebertARepondCLeloupC
Evidence for hypothalamic ketone body sensing: impact on food intake and peripheral metabolic responses in mice. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab (2016) 310(2):E103–15.10.1152/ajpendo.00282.201526530151
      
      
        127
        PierreKPellerinL. Monocarboxylate transporters in the central nervous system: distribution, regulation and function. J Neurochem (2005) 94(1):1–14.10.1111/j.1471-4159.2005.03168.x15953344
      
      
        128
        NaleczKA
Solute carriers in the blood–brain barrier: safety in abundance. Neurochem Res (2016).10.1007/s11064-016-2030-x
      
      
        129
        BergersenLWaerhaugOHelmJThomasMLaakePDaviesAJ
A novel postsynaptic density protein: the monocarboxylate transporter MCT2 is co-localized with d-glutamate receptors in postsynaptic densities of parallel fiber-Purkinje cell synapses. Exp Brain Res (2001) 136(4):523–34.10.1007/s00221000060011291733
      
      
        130
        BergersenLRafikiAOttersenOP. Immunogold cytochemistry identifies specialized membrane domains for monocarboxylate transport in the central nervous system. Neurochem Res (2002) 27(1):89–96.10.1023/A:101480672314711926280
      
      
        131
        RafikiABoullandJLHalestrapAPOttersenOPBergersenL. Highly differential expression of the monocarboxylate transporters MCT2 and MCT4 in the developing rat brain. Neuroscience (2003) 122(3):677–88.10.1016/j.neuroscience.2003.08.04014622911
      
      
        132
        GerhartDZEnersonBEZhdankinaOYLeinoRLDrewesLR
Expression of monocarboxylate transporter MCT1 by brain endothelium and glia in adult and suckling rats. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab (1997) 273(1):E207.
      
      
        133
        GerhartDZEnersonBEZhdankinaOYLeinoRLDrewesLR. Expression of the monocarboxylate transporter MCT2 by rat brain glia. Glia (1998) 22(3):272–81.10.1002/(SICI)1098-1136(199803)22:3&lt;272:AID-GLIA6&gt;3.0.CO;2-79482213
      
      
        134
        LeinoRLGerhartDZDrewesLR
Monocarboxylate transporter (MCT1) abundance in brains of suckling and adult rats: a quantitative electron microscopic immunogold study. Brain Res Dev Brain Res (1999) 113(1–2):47–54.10.1016/S0165-3806(98)00188-610064873
      
      
        135
        Cortes-CamposCElizondoRJCarrilCAMartínezFBoricKNualartF
MCT2 expression and lactate influx in anorexigenic and orexigenic neurons of the arcuate nucleus. PLoS One (2013) 8(4):e62532.10.1371/journal.pone.006253223638108
      
      
        136
        Le FollCDunn-MeynellAAMiziorkoHMLevinBE. Regulation of hypothalamic neuronal sensing and food intake by ketone bodies and fatty acids. Diabetes (2014) 63(4):1259–69.10.2337/db13-109024379353
      
      
        137
        Le FollCDunn-MeynellAAMiziorkoHMLevinBE. Role of VMH ketone bodies in adjusting caloric intake to increased dietary fat content in DIO and DR rats. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol (2015) 308(10):R872–8.10.1152/ajpregu.00015.201525786485
      
      
        138
        LopezMTovarSVazquezMJNogueirasRSenarisRDieguezC
Sensing the fat: fatty acid metabolism in the hypothalamus and the melanocortin system. Peptides (2005) 26(10):1753–8.10.1016/j.peptides.2004.11.02515979207
      
      
        139
        MagnanCLevinBELuquetS
Brain lipid sensing and the neural control of energy balance. Mol Cell Endocrinol (2015) 418(Pt 1):3–8.10.1016/j.mce.2015.09.01926415589
      
      
        140
        CristianoLCiminiAMorenoSRagnelliAMPaola CeruM. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) and related transcription factors in differentiating astrocyte cultures. Neuroscience (2005) 131(3):577–87.10.1016/j.neuroscience.2004.11.00815730864
      
      
        141
        HenekaMTLandrethGE
PPARs in the brain. Biochim Biophys Acta (2007) 1771(8):1031–45.10.1016/j.bbalip.2007.04.01617569578
      
      
        142
        HofmannKLamberzCPiotrowitzKOffermannNButDSchellerA
Tanycytes and a differential fatty acid metabolism in the hypothalamus. Glia (2016) 65(2):231–49.10.1002/glia.2308827726181
      
      
        143
        KampFGuoWSoutoRPilchPFCorkeyBEHamiltonJA. Rapid flip-flop of oleic acid across the plasma membrane of adipocytes. J Biol Chem (2003) 278(10):7988–95.10.1074/jbc.M20664820012499383
      
      
        144
        LevinVA. Relationship of octanol/water partition coefficient and molecular weight to rat brain capillary permeability. J Med Chem (1980) 23(6):682–4.10.1021/jm00180a0227392035
      
      
        145
        MitchellRWOnNHDel BigioMRMillerDWHatchGM. Fatty acid transport protein expression in human brain and potential role in fatty acid transport across human brain microvessel endothelial cells. J Neurochem (2011) 117(4):735–46.10.1111/j.1471-4159.2011.07245.x21395585
      
      
        146
        MitchellRWEdmundsonCLMillerDWHatchGM
On the mechanism of oleate transport across human brain microvessel endothelial cells. J Neurochem (2009) 110(3):1049–57.10.1111/j.1471-4159.2009.06199.x19493158
      
      
        147
        SongBJElbertARahmanTOrrSKChenCTFebbraioM
Genetic ablation of CD36 does not alter mouse brain polyunsaturated fatty acid concentrations. Lipids (2010) 45(4):291–9.10.1007/s11745-010-3398-z20306148
      
      
        148
        GreenwaltDEMatherIH. Characterization of an apically derived epithelial membrane glycoprotein from bovine milk, which is expressed in capillary endothelia in diverse tissues. J Cell Biol (1985) 100(2):397–408.10.1083/jcb.100.2.3973881456
      
      
        149
        HusemannJLoikeJDAnankovRFebbraioMSilversteinSC. Scavenger receptors in neurobiology and neuropathology: their role on microglia and other cells of the nervous system. Glia (2002) 40(2):195–205.10.1002/glia.1014812379907
      
      
        150
        Le FollCIraniBGMagnanCDunn-MeynellAALevinBE. Characteristics and mechanisms of hypothalamic neuronal fatty acid sensing. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol (2009) 297(3):R655–64.10.1152/ajpregu.00223.200919535676
      
      
        151
        BaoYQinLKimEBhosleSGuoHFebbraioM
CD36 is involved in astrocyte activation and astroglial scar formation. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab (2012) 32(8):1567–77.10.1038/jcbfm.2012.5222510603
      
      
        152
        Le FollCDunn-MeynellAMusatovSMagnanCLevinBE. FAT/CD36: a major regulator of neuronal fatty acid sensing and energy homeostasis in rats and mice. Diabetes (2013) 62(8):2709–16.10.2337/db12-168923557700
      
      
        153
        BoylesJKPitasREWilsonEMahleyRWTaylorJM
Apolipoprotein E associated with astrocytic glia of the central nervous system and with non-myelinating glia of the peripheral nervous system. J Clin Invest (1985) 76:1501–13.10.1172/JCI1121303932467
      
      
        154
        ShenLTsoPWangDQHWoodsSCDavidsonWSSakaiR
Up-regulation of apolipoprotein E by leptin in the hypothalamus of mice and rats. Physiol Behav (2009) 98(1–2):223–8.10.1016/j.physbeh.2009.05.01319481557
      
      
        155
        RomanCFuiorEVTruscaVGKardassisDSimionescuMGafencuAV. Thyroid hormones upregulate apolipoprotein E gene expression in astrocytes. Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2015) 468(1–2):190–5.10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.10.13226519880
      
      
        156
        ShenLTsoPWoodsSCCleggDJBarberKLCareyK
Brain apolipoprotein E: an important regulator of food intake in rats. Diabetes (2008) 57(8):2092–8.10.2337/db08-029118559657
      
      
        157
        SchwartzMWSeeleyRJCampfieldLABurnPBaskinDG. Identification of targets of leptin action in rat hypothalamus. J Clin Invest (1996) 98(5):1101–6.10.1172/JCI1188918787671
      
      
        158
        WangQBingCAl-BarazanjiKMossakowaskaDEWangXMcBayDL
Interactions between leptin and hypothalamic neuropeptide Y neurons in the control of food intake and energy homeostasis in the rat. Diabetes (1997) 46(3):335–41.10.2337/diab.46.3.3359032086
      
      
        159
        CowleyMASmartJLRubinsteinMCerdanMGDianoSHorvathTL
Leptin activates anorexigenic POMC neurons through a neural network in the arcuate nucleus. Nature (2001) 411(6836):480–4.10.1038/3507808511373681
      
      
        160
        KamoharaSBurcelinRHalaasJLFriedmanJMCharronMJ. Acute stimulation of glucose metabolism in mice by leptin treatment. Nature (1997) 389(6649):374–7.10.1038/387179311777
      
      
        161
        FrühbeckGAguadoMGómez-AmbrosiJMartínezJA. Lipolytic effect of in vivo leptin administration on adipocytes of lean and ob/ob mice, but not db/db mice. Biochem Biophys Res Commun (1998) 250(1):99–102.10.1006/bbrc.1998.92779735339
      
      
        162
        BjørbaekCElmquistJKMichlPAhimaRSvan BuerenAMcCallAL
Expression of leptin receptor isoforms in rat brain microvessels. Endocrinology (1998) 139(8):3485–91.10.1210/endo.139.8.6154
      
      
        163
        PanWHsuchouHTuHKastinAJ. Developmental changes of leptin receptors in cerebral microvessels: unexpected relation to leptin transport. Endocrinology (2008) 149(3):877–85.10.1210/en.2007-089318039787
      
      
        164
        HsuchouHHeYKastinAJTuHMarkadakisENRogersRC
Obesity induces functional astrocytic leptin receptors in hypothalamus. Brain (2009) 132(4):889–902.10.1093/brain/awp02919293246
      
      
        165
        BallandEDamJLangletFCaronESteculorumSMessinaA
Hypothalamic tanycytes are an ERK-gated conduit for leptin into the brain. Cell Metab (2014) 19(2):293–301.10.1016/j.cmet.2013.12.01524506870
      
      
        166
        HsuchouHKastinAJTuHMarkadakisENStoneKPWangY
Effects of cell-type specific leptin receptor mutation on leptin transport across the BBB. Peptides (2011) 32(7):1392–9.10.1016/j.peptides.2011.05.01121616110
      
      
        167
        Gonzalez-CarterDGoodeAEFiammengoRDunlopIEDexterDTPorterAE. Inhibition of leptin-ObR interaction does not prevent leptin translocation across a human blood–brain barrier model. J Neuroendocrinol (2016) 28(6).10.1111/jne.1239227037668
      
      
        168
        ZlokovicBVJovanovicSMiaoWSamaraSVermaSFarrellCL. Differential regulation of leptin transport by the choroid plexus and blood–brain barrier and high affinity transport systems for entry into hypothalamus and across the blood-cerebrospinal fluid barrier. Endocrinology (2000) 141(4):1434–41.10.1210/endo.141.4.743510746647
      
      
        169
        FaouziMLeshanRBjörnholmMHennesseyTJonesJMünzbergH. Differential accessibility of circulating leptin to individual hypothalamic sites. Endocrinology (2007) 148(11):5414–23.10.1210/en.2007-065517690165
      
      
        170
        BaumannHMorellaKKWhiteDWDembskiMBailonPSKimH
The full-length leptin receptor has signaling capabilities of interleukin 6-type cytokine receptors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1996) 93(16):8374–8.10.1073/pnas.93.16.83748710878
      
      
        171
        MunzbergHMyersMGJ. Molecular and anatomical determinants of central leptin resistance. Nat Neurosci (2005) 8(5):566–70.10.1038/nn145415856064
      
      
        172
        KwonOKimKWKimM. Leptin signalling pathways in hypothalamic neurons. Cell Mol Life Sci (2016) 73(7):1457–77.10.1007/s00018-016-2133-126786898
      
      
        173
        KimJGSuyamaSKochMJinSArgente-ArizonPArgenteJ
Leptin signaling in astrocytes regulates hypothalamic neuronal circuits and feeding. Nat Neurosci (2014) 17(7):908–10.10.1038/nn.372524880214
      
      
        174
        WangYHsuchouHHeYKastinAJPanW. Role of astrocytes in leptin signaling. J Mol Neurosci (2015) 56(4):829–39.10.1007/s12031-015-0518-525687329
      
      
        175
        BallandECowleyMA
New insights in leptin resistance mechanisms in mice. Front Neuroendocrinol (2015) 39:59–65.10.1016/j.yfrne.2015.09.00426410445
      
      
        176
        KnightZAHannanKSGreenbergMLFriedmanJM. Hyperleptinemia is required for the development of leptin resistance. PLoS One (2010) 5(6):e11376.10.1371/journal.pone.001137620613882
      
      
        177
        de GitKCAdanRA
Leptin resistance in diet-induced obesity: the role of hypothalamic inflammation. Obes Rev (2015) 16(3):207–24.10.1111/obr.1224325589226
      
      
        178
        OttawayNMahbodPRiveroBNormanLAGertlerAD’AlessioDA
Diet-induced obese mice retain endogenous leptin action. Cell Metab (2015) 21(6):877–82.10.1016/j.cmet.2015.04.01525980347
      
      
        179
        FlakJNMyersMGJr
CNS mechanisms of leptin action. Mol Endocrinol (2016) 30(1):3–12.10.1210/me.2015-123226484582
      
      
        180
        KastinAJAkerstromV. Glucose and insulin increase the transport of leptin through the blood–brain barrier in normal mice but not in streptozotocin-diabetic mice. Neuroendocrinology (2001) 73(4):237–42.10.1159/00005464011340337
      
      
        181
        BanksWACoonABRobinsonSMMoinuddinAShultzJMNakaokeR
Triglycerides induce leptin resistance at the blood–brain barrier. Diabetes (2004) 53(5):1253.10.2337/diabetes.53.5.125315111494
      
      
        182
        KastinAJAkerstromV. Fasting, but not adrenalectomy, reduces transport of leptin into the brain. Peptides (2000) 21(5):679–82.10.1016/S0196-9781(00)00195-910876050
      
      
        183
        KojimaMHosodaHDateYNakazatoMMatsuoHKangawaK. Ghrelin is a growth-hormone-releasing acylated peptide from stomach. Nature (1999) 402(6762):656–60.10.1038/4523010604470
      
      
        184
        HorvathTLDianoSSotonyiPHeimanMLTschöpM
Minireview: ghrelin and the regulation of energy balance—a hypothalamic perspective. Endocrinology (2001) 142(10):4163–9.10.1210/endo.142.10.8490
      
      
        185
        HosodaHKojimaMMizushimaTShimizuSKangawaK. Structural divergence of human ghrelin: identification of multiple ghrelin-derived molecules produced by post-translational processing. J Biol Chem (2003) 278(1):64–70.10.1074/jbc.M20536620012414809
      
      
        186
        GaheteMDCordoba-ChaconJSalvatoriRCastanoJPKinemanRDLuqueRM. Metabolic regulation of ghrelin O-acyl transferase (GOAT) expression in the mouse hypothalamus, pituitary, and stomach. Mol Cell Endocrinol (2010) 317(1–2):154–60.10.1016/j.mce.2009.12.02320035826
      
      
        187
        StaesEAbsilPALinsLBrasseurRDeleuMLecouturierN
Acylated and unacylated ghrelin binding to membranes and to ghrelin receptor: towards a better understanding of the underlying mechanisms. Biochim Biophys Acta (2010) 1798(11):2102–13.10.1016/j.bbamem.2010.07.00220637180
      
      
        188
        ZigmanJMJonesJELeeCESaperCBElmquistJK. Expression of ghrelin receptor mRNA in the rat and the mouse brain. J Comp Neurol (2006) 494(3):528–48.10.1002/cne.2082316320257
      
      
        189
        ColldenGBallandEParkashJCaronELangletFPrevotV
Neonatal overnutrition causes early alterations in the central response to peripheral ghrelin. Mol Metab (2015) 4(1):15–24.10.1016/j.molmet.2014.10.00325685686
      
      
        190
        BanksWATschopMRobinsonSMHeimanML. Extent and direction of ghrelin transport across the blood–brain barrier is determined by its unique primary structure. J Pharmacol Exp Ther (2002) 302(2):822–7.10.1124/jpet.102.03482712130749
      
      
        191
        BanksWABurneyBORobinsonSM. Effects of triglycerides, obesity, and starvation on ghrelin transport across the blood–brain barrier. Peptides (2008) 29(11):2061–5.10.1016/j.peptides.2008.07.00118682266
      
      
        192
        BriggsDIEnrioriPJLemusMBCowleyMAAndrewsZB. Diet-induced obesity causes ghrelin resistance in arcuate NPY/AgRP neurons. Endocrinology (2010) 151(10):4745–55.10.1210/en.2010-055620826561
      
      
        193
        ToshinaiKYamaguchiHSunYSmithRGYamanakaASakuraiT
Des-acyl ghrelin induces food intake by a mechanism independent of the growth hormone secretagogue receptor. Endocrinology (2006) 147(5):2306–14.10.1210/en.2005-135716484324
      
      
        194
        DelhantyPJNeggersSJvan der LelyAJ. Des-acyl ghrelin: a metabolically active peptide. Endocr Dev (2013) 25:112–21.10.1159/00034605923652397
      
      
        195
        García-CáceresCFuente-MartinEDiazFGranadoMArgente-ArizonPFragoLM
The opposing effects of ghrelin on hypothalamic and systemic inflammatory processes are modulated by its acylation status and food intake in male rats. Endocrinology (2014) 155(8):2868–80.10.1210/en.2014-107424848869
      
      
        196
        StevanovicDMGrefhorstAThemmenAPNPopovicVHolstegeJHaasdijkE
Unacylated ghrelin suppresses ghrelin-induced neuronal activity in the hypothalamus and brainstem of male rats. PLoS One (2014) 9(5):e9818010.1371/journal.pone.009818024852945
      
      
        197
        BeggDPWoodsSC. The central insulin system and energy balance. Handb Exp Pharmacol (2012) 209:111–29.10.1007/978-3-642-24716-3_522249812
      
      
        198
        BanksWAJaspanJBHuangWKastinAJ. Transport of insulin across the blood–brain barrier: saturability at euglycemic doses of insulin. Peptides (1997) 18(9):1423–9.10.1016/S0196-9781(97)00231-39392846
      
      
        199
        MeijerRIGraySAylorKBarrettEJ. Pathways for insulin access to the brain: the role of the microvascular endothelial cell. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol (2016) 311(5):H1132–8.10.1152/ajpheart.00081.201627591216
      
      
        200
        MayAALiuMWoodsSCBeggDP
CCK increases the transport of insulin into the brain. Physiol Behav (2016) 165:392–7.10.1016/j.physbeh.2016.08.02527570192
      
      
        201
        MayAABedelNDShenLWoodsSCLiuM
Estrogen and insulin transport through the blood–brain barrier. Physiol Behav (2016) 163:312–21.10.1016/j.physbeh.2016.05.01927182046
      
      
        202
        KochCEAugustineRAStegerJGanjamGKBenzlerJPrachtC
Leptin rapidly improves glucose homeostasis in obese mice by increasing hypothalamic insulin sensitivity. J Neurosci (2010) 30(48):16180–7.10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3202-10.201021123564
      
      
        203
        SartoriusTHeniMTschritterOPreisslHHoppSFritscheA
Leptin affects insulin action in astrocytes and impairs insulin-mediated physical activity. Cell Physiol Biochem (2012) 30(1):238–46.10.1159/00033906022759970
      
      
        204
        XuAWKaelinCBTakedaKAkiraSSchwartzMWBarshGS. PI3K integrates the action of insulin and leptin on hypothalamic neurons. J Clin Invest (2005) 115(4):951–8.10.1172/JCI20052430115761497
      
      
        205
        BenoitSCKempCJEliasCFAbplanalpWHermanJPMigrenneS
Palmitic acid mediates hypothalamic insulin resistance by altering PKC-theta subcellular localization in rodents. J Clin Invest (2009) 119(9):2577–89.10.1172/JCI3671419726875
      
      
        206
        BodenGCheungPSteinTPKresgeKMozzoliM. FFA cause hepatic insulin resistance by inhibiting insulin suppression of glycogenolysis. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab (2002) 283(1):E12.10.1152/ajpendo.00429.200112067837
      
      
        207
        PardridgeWM. New approaches to drug delivery through the blood–brain barrier. Trends Biotechnol (1994) 12(6):239–45.10.1016/0167-7799(94)90123-67765071
      
      
        208
        BaulieuEERobelP. Neurosteroids: a new brain function?
J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol (1990) 37(3):395–403.10.1016/0960-0760(90)90490-C2257243
      
      
        209
        ReddyDS. Neurosteroids: endogenous role in the human brain and therapeutic potentials. Prog Brain Res (2010) 186:113–37.10.1016/B978-0-444-53630-3.00008-721094889
      
      
        210
        Jung-TestasIBaulieuEE. Steroid hormone receptors and steroid action in rat glial cells of the central and peripheral nervous system. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol (1998) 65(1–6):243–51.10.1016/S0960-0760(97)00191-X9699879
      
      
        211
        Mensah-NyaganAGDo-RegoJLBeaujeanDLuu-TheVPelletierGVaudryH
Neurosteroids: expression of steroidogenic enzymes and regulation of steroid biosynthesis in the central nervous system. Pharmacol Rev (1999) 51(1):63.10049998
      
      
        212
        Agís-BalboaRCPinnaGZhubiAMalokuEVeldicMCostaE
Characterization of brain neurons that express enzymes mediating neurosteroid biosynthesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2006) 103(39):14602–7.10.1073/pnas.060654410316984997
      
      
        213
        MouriecKGueguenMMManuelCPercevaultFThieulantMLPakdelF
Androgens upregulate cyp19a1b (aromatase b) gene expression in the brain of zebrafish (Danio rerio) through estrogen receptors. Biol Reprod (2009) 80(5):889–96.10.1095/biolreprod.108.07364319129512
      
      
        214
        ChenCKuoJWongAMicevychP. Estradiol modulates translocator protein (TSPO) and steroid acute regulatory protein (StAR) via protein kinase a (PKA) signaling in hypothalamic astrocytes. Endocrinology (2014) 155(8):2976–85.10.1210/en.2013-184424877623
      
      
        215
        WicherGNorlinM. Estrogen-mediated regulation of steroid metabolism in rat glial cells; effects on neurosteroid levels via regulation of CYP7B1-mediated catalysis. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol (2015) 145:21–7.10.1016/j.jsbmb.2014.09.02225263657
      
      
        216
        XingLEsauCTrudeauVL
Direct regulation of aromatase B expression by 17beta-estradiol and dopamine D1 receptor agonist in adult radial glial cells. Front Neurosci (2015) 9:50410.3389/fnins.2015.0050426793050
      
      
        217
        YilmazMBZhaoHBrooksDCFenkciIVImir-YenicesuGAttarE
Estrogen receptor alpha (Esr1) regulates aromatase (Cyp19a1) expression in the mouse brain. Neuro Endocrinol Lett (2015) 36(2):178–82.26071589
      
      
        218
        Jung-TestasIRenoirJMGascJMBaulieuEE. Estrogen-inducible progesterone receptor in primary cultures of rat glial cells. Exp Cell Res (1991) 193(1):12–9.10.1016/0014-4827(91)90532-Y1995287
      
      
        219
        LiuXShiH
Regulation of estrogen receptor alpha expression in the hypothalamus by sex steroids: implication in the regulation of energy homeostasis. Int J Endocrinol (2015) 2015:94908510.1155/2015/94908526491443
      
      
        220
        WisePM. Estradiol exerts neuroprotective actions against ischemic brain injury: insights derived from animal models. Endocrine (2003) 21(1):11–5.10.1385/ENDO:21:1:1112777698
      
      
        221
        VegetoEBenedusiVMaggiA. Estrogen anti-inflammatory activity in brain: a therapeutic opportunity for menopause and neurodegenerative diseases. Front Neuroendocrinol (2008) 29(4):507–19.10.1016/j.yfrne.2008.04.00118522863
      
      
        222
        GoldSMVoskuhlRR. Estrogen and testosterone therapies in multiple sclerosis. Prog Brain Res (2009) 175:239–51.10.1016/S0079-6123(09)17516-719660660
      
      
        223
        SarkakiARKhaksari HaddadMSoltaniZShahrokhiNMahmoodiM
Time- and dose-dependent neuroprotective effects of sex steroid hormones on inflammatory cytokines after a traumatic brain injury. J Neurotrauma (2011) 30(1):47–54.10.1089/neu.2010.1686
      
      
        224
        DayNLFloydCLD’AlessandroTLHubbardWJChaudryIH
17β-Estradiol confers protection after traumatic brain injury in the rat and involves activation of G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1. J Neurotrauma (2013) 30(17):1531–41.10.1089/neu.2013.285423659385
      
      
        225
        De NicolaAFGonzalez-DeniselleMCGarayLMeyerMGargiulo-MonachelliGGuennounR
Progesterone protective effects in neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation. J Neuroendocrinol (2013) 25(11):1095–103.10.1111/jne.1204323639063
      
      
        226
        BrotfainEGruenbaumSEBoykoMKutzRZlotnikAKleinM. Neuroprotection by estrogen and progesterone in traumatic brain injury and spinal cord injury. Curr Neuropharmacol (2016) 14(6):641–53.10.2174/1570159X1466616030912355426955967
      
      
        227
        RahmaniBGhasemiRDargahiLAhmadianiAHaeriA. Neurosteroids; potential underpinning roles in maintaining homeostasis. Gen Comp Endocrinol (2016) 225:242–50.10.1016/j.ygcen.2015.09.03026432100
      
      
        228
        García-SeguraLMWozniakAAzcoitiaIRodriguezJRHutchisonREHutchisonJB. Aromatase expression by astrocytes after brain injury: implications for local estrogen formation in brain repair. Neuroscience (1999) 89(2):567–78.10.1016/S0306-4522(98)00340-610077336
      
      
        229
        AzcoitiaISierraAVeigaSGarcía-SeguraLM. Aromatase expression by reactive astroglia is neuroprotective. Ann N Y Acad Sci (2003) 1007:298–305.10.1196/annals.1286.02814993062
      
      
        230
        SaldanhaCJDuncanKAWaltersBJ. Neuroprotective actions of brain aromatase. Front Neuroendocrinol (2009) 30(2):106–18.10.1016/j.yfrne.2009.04.01619450619
      
      
        231
        JohannSBeyerC. Neuroprotection by gonadal steroid hormones in acute brain damage requires cooperation with astroglia and microglia. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol (2013) 137:71–81.10.1016/j.jsbmb.2012.11.00623196064
      
      
        232
        KippMKarakayaSJohannSKampmannEMeyJBeyerC
Oestrogen and progesterone reduce lipopolysaccharide-induced expression of tumour necrosis factor-α and interleukin-18 in midbrain astrocytes. J Neuroendocrinol (2007) 19(10):819–22.10.1111/j.1365-2826.2007.01588.x17850464
      
      
        233
        LewisDKJohnsonABStohlgrenSSimpsonASohrabjiF. Effects of estrogen receptor agonists on regulation of the inflammatory response in astrocytes from young adult and middle-aged female rats. J Neuroimmunol (2008) 195(1–2):47–59.10.1016/j.jneuroim.2008.01.00618328572
      
      
        234
        CerciatMUnkilaMGarcia-SeguraLMArevaloMA
Selective estrogen receptor modulators decrease the production of interleukin-6 and interferon-γ-inducible protein-10 by astrocytes exposed to inflammatory challenge in vitro. Glia (2010) 58(1):93–102.10.1002/glia.2090419533603
      
      
        235
        Bruce-KellerAJKeelingJLKellerJNHuangFFCamondolaSMattsonMP
Antiinflammatory effects of estrogen on microglial activation. Endocrinology (2000) 141(10):3646–56.10.1210/endo.141.10.769311014219
      
      
        236
        DrewPDChavisJA. Female sex steroids: effects upon microglial cell activation. J Neuroimmunol (2000) 111(1–2):77–85.10.1016/S0165-5728(00)00386-611063824
      
      
        237
        DimayugaFOReedJLCarneroGAWangCDimayugaERDimayugaVM
Estrogen and brain inflammation: effects on microglial expression of MHC, costimulatory molecules and cytokines. J Neuroimmunol (2005) 161(1–2):123–36.10.1016/j.jneuroim.2004.12.01615748951
      
      
        238
        VegetoEBelcreditoSGhislettiSMedaCEtteriSMaggiA. The endogenous estrogen status regulates microglia reactivity in animal models of neuroinflammation. Endocrinology (2006) 147(5):2263–72.10.1210/en.2005-133016469811
      
      
        239
        CzajaJAGoyRW
Ovarian hormones and food intake in female guinea pigs and rhesus monkeys. Horm Behav (1975) 6(4):329–49.10.1016/0018-506X(75)90003-3816725
      
      
        240
        ButeraPCCzajaJA. Intracranial estradiol in ovariectomized guinea pigs: effects on ingestive behaviors and body weight. Brain Res (1984) 322(1):41–8.10.1016/0006-8993(84)91178-86518373
      
      
        241
        GaoQMezeiGNieYRaoYChoiCSBechmannI
Anorectic estrogen mimics leptin’s effect on the rewiring of melanocortin cells and Stat3 signaling in obese animals. Nat Med (2007) 13(1):89–94.10.1038/nm152517195839
      
      
        242
        MusatovSChenWPfaffDWMobbsCVYangXJCleggDJ
Silencing of estrogen receptor α in the ventromedial nucleus of hypothalamus leads to metabolic syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2007) 104(7):2501–6.10.1073/pnas.061078710417284595
      
      
        243
        CleggDJBrownLMWoodsSCBenoitSC. Gonadal hormones determine sensitivity to central leptin and insulin. Diabetes (2006) 55(4):978–87.10.2337/diabetes.55.04.06.db05-133916567519
      
      
        244
        CleggDJBrownLMZigmanJMKempCJStraderADBenoitSC
Estradiol-dependent decrease in the orexigenic potency of ghrelin in female rats. Diabetes (2007) 56(4):1051–8.10.2337/db06-001517251274
      
      
        245
        XuYNedungadiTPZhuLSobhaniNIraniBGDavisKE
Distinct hypothalamic neurons mediate estrogenic effects on energy homeostasis and reproduction. Cell Metab (2011) 14(4):453–65.10.1016/j.cmet.2011.08.00921982706
      
      
        246
        SmithAWRonnekleivOKKellyMJ. Gq-mER signaling has opposite effects on hypothalamic orexigenic and anorexigenic neurons. Steroids (2014) 81:31–5.10.1016/j.steroids.2013.11.00724269736
      
      
        247
        GearyNAsarianLKorachKSPfaffDWOgawaS
Deficits in E2-dependent control of feeding, weight gain, and cholecystokinin satiation in ER-α null mice. Endocrinology (2001) 142(11):4751–7.10.1210/endo.142.11.8504
      
      
        248
        AsarianLGearyN. Cyclic estradiol treatment normalizes body weight and restores physiological patterns of spontaneous feeding and sexual receptivity in ovariectomized rats. Horm Behav (2002) 42(4):461–71.10.1006/hbeh.2002.183512488112
      
      
        249
        AsarianLGearyN. Modulation of appetite by gonadal steroid hormones. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci (2006) 361(1471):1251–63.10.1098/rstb.2006.186016815802
      
      
        250
        LiangYQAkishitaMKimSAkoJHashimotoMIijimaK
Estrogen receptor beta is involved in the anorectic action of estrogen. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord (2002) 26(8):1103–9.10.1038/sj.ijo.080205412119576
      
      
        251
        RoeschDM. Effects of selective estrogen receptor agonists on food intake and body weight gain in rats. Physiol Behav (2006) 87(1):39–44.10.1016/j.physbeh.2005.08.03516181647
      
      
        252
        SantolloJKatzenellenbogenBSKatzenellenbogenJAEckelLA
Activation of ERα is necessary for estradiol’s anorexigenic effect in female rats. Horm Behav (2010) 58(5):872–7.10.1016/j.yhbeh.2010.08.01220807534
      
      
        253
        QiuJBoschMATobiasSCKrustAGrahamSMMurphySJ
A G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor is involved in hypothalamic control of energy homeostasis. J Neurosci (2006) 26(21):5649–55.10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0327-06.200616723521
      
      
        254
        RoepkeTABoschMARickEALeeBWagnerEJSeidlova-WuttkeD
Contribution of a membrane estrogen receptor to the estrogenic regulation of body temperature and energy homeostasis. Endocrinology (2010) 151(10):4926–37.10.1210/en.2010-057320685867
      
      
        255
        FilardoEJQuinnJABlandKIFrackeltonAR
Estrogen-induced activation of Erk-1 and Erk-2 requires the G protein-coupled receptor homolog, GPR30, and occurs via trans-activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor through release of HB-EGF. Mol Endocrinol (2000) 14(10):1649–60.10.1210/mend.14.10.053211043579
      
      
        256
        DavisKECarstensEJIraniBGGentLMHahnerLMCleggDJ. Sexually dimorphic role of G protein-coupled estrogen receptor (GPER) in modulating energy homeostasis. Horm Behav (2014) 66(1):196–207.10.1016/j.yhbeh.2014.02.00424560890
      
      
        257
        Magnus-LevyA
Uber den respiratorischen Gaswechsel unter Einfluss der Thyroidea sowie unter verschiedenen pathologische Zustand. Berlin Klin Wochschr (1895) 32:650–2.
      
      
        258
        SjögrenMAlkemadeAMittagJNordströmKKatzARozellB
Hypermetabolism in mice caused by the central action of an unliganded thyroid hormone receptor α1. EMBO J (2007) 26(21):4535–45.10.1038/sj.emboj.760188217932484
      
      
        259
        LopezMVarelaLVazquezMJRodriguez-CuencaSGonzalezCRVelagapudiVR
Hypothalamic AMPK and fatty acid metabolism mediate thyroid regulation of energy balance. Nat Med (2010) 16(9):1001–8.10.1038/nm.220720802499
      
      
        260
        De LeoSLeeSYBravermanLE. Hyperthyroidism. Lancet (2016) 388(10047):906–18.10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00278-627038492
      
      
        261
        IngbarSH
The thyroid gland. In: WilsonJDFosterDW, editors. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. Philadelphia, PA: W. B. Saunders Company (1985). p. 975–1170.
      
      
        262
        LimaFRSGervaisAColinCIzembartMNetoVMMallatM. Regulation of microglial development: a novel role for thyroid hormone. J Neurosci (2001) 21(6):2028–38.11245686
      
      
        263
        NamSMKimYNYooDYYiSSChoiJHHwangIK
Hypothyroidism affects astrocyte and microglial morphology in type 2 diabetes. Neural Regen Res (2013) 8(26):2458–67.10.3969/j.issn.1673-5374.2013.26.00725206556
      
      
        264
        XuMIwasakiTShimokawaNSajdel-SulkowskaEMKoibuchiN. The effect of low dose lipopolysaccharide on thyroid hormone-regulated actin cytoskeleton modulation and type 2 iodothyronine deiodinase activity in astrocytes. Endocr J (2013) 60(11):1221–30.10.1507/endocrj.EJ13-029423965412
      
      
        265
        KlieverikLPJanssenSFvan RielAFoppenEBisschopPHSerlieMJ
Thyroid hormone modulates glucose production via a sympathetic pathway from the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus to the liver. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009) 106(14):5966–71.10.1073/pnas.080535510619321430
      
      
        266
        FliersEKlieverikLPKalsbeekA
Novel neural pathways for metabolic effects of thyroid hormone. Trends Endocrinol Metab (2010) 21(4):230–6.10.1016/j.tem.2009.11.00820005733
      
      
        267
        LeonardJLKoehrleJ
Intracellular pathways of iodothyronine metabolism. In: BravermanLEUtigerRD, editors. The Thyroid. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins (2000). p. 136–73.
      
      
        268
        BiancoACKimBW. Deiodinases: implications of the local control of thyroid hormone action. J Clin Invest (2006) 116(10):2571–9.10.1172/JCI2981217016550
      
      
        269
        BiancoACSalvatoreDGerebenBBerryMJLarsenPR. Biochemistry, cellular and molecular biology, and physiological roles of the iodothyronine selenodeiodinases. Endocr Rev (2002) 23(1):38–89.10.1210/edrv.23.1.045511844744
      
      
        270
        SeneseRCioffiFde LangePGogliaFLanniA
Thyroid: biological actions of ‘nonclassical’ thyroid hormones. J Endocrinol (2014) 221(2):R1–12.10.1530/joe-13-057324464019
      
      
        271
        FriesemaECHGangulySAbdallaAFoxJEMHalestrapAPVisserTJ. Identification of monocarboxylate transporter 8 as a specific thyroid hormone transporter. J Biol Chem (2003) 278(41):40128–35.10.1074/jbc.M30090920012871948
      
      
        272
        PizzagalliFHagenbuchBStiegerBKlenkUFolkersGMeierPJ. Identification of a novel human organic anion transporting polypeptide as a high affinity thyroxine transporter. Mol Endocrinol (2002) 16(10):2283–96.10.1210/me.2001-030912351693
      
      
        273
        MayerlSMüllerJBauerRRichertSKassmannCMDarrasVM
Transporters MCT8 and OATP1C1 maintain murine brain thyroid hormone homeostasis. J Clin Invest (2014) 124(5):1987–99.10.1172/JCI7032424691440
      
      
        274
        RobertsLMWoodfordKZhouMBlackDSHaggertyJETateEH
Expression of the thyroid hormone transporters monocarboxylate transporter-8 (SLC16A2) and organic ion transporter-14 (SLCO1C1) at the blood–brain barrier. Endocrinology (2008) 149(12):6251–61.10.1210/en.2008-037818687783
      
      
        275
        HeuerHMaierMKIdenSMittagJFriesemaECHVisserTJ
The monocarboxylate transporter 8 linked to human psychomotor retardation is highly expressed in thyroid hormone-sensitive neuron populations. Endocrinology (2005) 146(4):1701–6.10.1210/en.2004-117915661862
      
      
        276
        AlkemadeAFriesemaECHKalsbeekASwaabDFVisserTJFliersE. Expression of thyroid hormone transporters in the human hypothalamus. J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2011) 96(6):E967–71.10.1210/jc.2010-275021508134
      
      
        277
        MüllerJHeuerH
Expression pattern of thyroid hormone transporters in the postnatal mouse brain. Front Endocrino (2014) 5:9210.3389/fendo.2014.00092
      
      
        278
        TuHMKimSWSalvatoreDBarthaTLegradiGLarsenPR
Regional distribution of type 2 thyroxine deiodinase messenger ribonucleic acid in rat hypothalamus and pituitary and its regulation by thyroid hormone. Endocrinology (1997) 138(8):3359–68.10.1210/endo.138.8.53189231788
      
      
        279
        DianoSNaftolinFGogliaFCsernusVHorvathTL
Monosynaptic pathway between the arcuate nucleus expressing glial type II iodothyronine 5′-deiodinase mRNA and the median eminence-projective TRH cells of the rat paraventricular nucleus. J Neuroendocrinol (1998) 10(10):731–42.10.1046/j.1365-2826.1998.00204.x9792325
      
      
        280
        AlkemadeAFriesemaECUnmehopaUAFabriekBOKuiperGGLeonardJL
Neuroanatomical pathways for thyroid hormone feedback in the human hypothalamus. J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2005) 90(7):4322–34.10.1210/jc.2004-256715840737
      
      
        281
        Martinez-SanchezNAlvarezCVFernoJNogueirasRDieguezCLopezM. Hypothalamic effects of thyroid hormones on metabolism. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab (2014) 28(5):703–12.10.1016/j.beem.2014.04.00425256765
      
      
        282
        CoppolaAMeliRDianoS. Inverse shift in circulating corticosterone and leptin levels elevates hypothalamic deiodinase type 2 in fasted rats. Endocrinology (2005) 146(6):2827–33.10.1210/en.2004-136115746256
      
      
        283
        CoppolaALiuZWAndrewsZParadisERoyMCFriedmanJM
A central thermogenic-like mechanism in feeding regulation: an interplay between arcuate nucleus T3 and UCP2. Cell Metab (2007) 5(1):21–33.10.1016/j.cmet.2006.12.00217189204
      
      
        284
        VarelaLMartínez-SánchezNGallegoRVázquezMJRoaJGándaraM
Hypothalamic mTOR pathway mediates thyroid hormone-induced hyperphagia in hyperthyroidism. J Pathol (2012) 227(2):209–22.10.1002/path.398422294347
      
      
        285
        EblingFJP. Hypothalamic control of seasonal changes in food intake and body weight. Front Neuroendocrinol (2015) 37:97–107.10.1016/j.yfrne.2014.10.00325449796
      
      
        286
        ShearerKDGoodmanTHRossAWReillyLMorganPJMcCafferyPJ. Photoperiodic regulation of retinoic acid signaling in the hypothalamus. J Neurochem (2010) 112(1):246–57.10.1111/j.1471-4159.2009.06455.x19860856
      
      
        287
        HelferGRossAWRussellLThomsonLMShearerKDGoodmanTH
Photoperiod regulates vitamin A and Wnt/β-catenin signaling in F344 rats. Endocrinology (2012) 153(2):815–24.10.1210/en.2011-179222210746
      
      
        288
        BrentGA. Mechanisms of thyroid hormone action. J Clin Invest (2012) 122(9):3035–43.10.1172/JCI6004722945636
      
      
        289
        ChengSYLeonardJLDavisPJ. Molecular aspects of thyroid hormone actions. Endocr Rev (2010) 31(2):139–70.10.1210/er.2009-000720051527
      
      
        290
        DavisPJDavisFB
Nongenomic actions of thyroid hormone. Thyroid (1996) 6(5):497–504.10.1089/thy.1996.6.4978936679
      
      
        291
        KalyanaramanHSchwappacherRJoshuaJZhuangSScottBTKlosM
Nongenomic thyroid hormone signaling occurs through a plasma membrane-localized receptor. Sci Signal (2014) 7(326):ra4810.1126/scisignal.200491124847117
      
      
        292
        HiroiYKimHHYingHFuruyaFHuangZSimonciniT
Rapid nongenomic actions of thyroid hormone. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2006) 103(38):14104–9.10.1073/pnas.060160010316966610
      
      
        293
        LosiGGarzonGPuiaG. Nongenomic regulation of glutamatergic neurotransmission in hippocampus by thyroid hormones. Neuroscience (2008) 151(1):155–63.10.1016/j.neuroscience.2007.09.06418065155
      
      
        294
        CariaMADratmanMBKowLMMameliOPavlidesC. Thyroid hormone action: nongenomic modulation of neuronal excitability in the hippocampus. J Neuroendocrinol (2009) 21(2):98–107.10.1111/j.1365-2826.2008.01813.x19076268
      
      
        295
        SanchezEVargasMASingruPSPascualIRomeroFFeketeC
Tanycyte pyroglutamyl peptidase II contributes to regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis through glial-axonal associations in the median eminence. Endocrinology (2009) 150(5):2283–91.10.1210/en.2008-164319179432
      
      
        296
        LégrádiGEmersonCHAhimaRSFlierJSLechanRM
Leptin prevents fasting-induced suppression of prothyrotropin-releasing hormone messenger ribonucleic acid in neurons of the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus. Endocrinology (1997) 138(6):2569–76.10.1210/endo.138.6.5209
      
      
        297
        SeoaneLMCarroETovarSCasanuevaFFDieguezC. Regulation of in vivo TSH secretion by leptin. Regul Pept (2000) 92(1–3):25–9.10.1016/S0167-0115(00)00145-211024561
      
      
        298
        Ortiga-CarvalhoTMOliveiraKJSoaresBAPazos-MouraCC. The role of leptin in the regulation of TSH secretion in the fed state: in vivo and in vitro studies. J Endocrinol (2002) 174(1):121–5.10.1677/joe.0.174012112098670
      
      
        299
        AhlquistJAFranklynJAWoodDFBalfourNJDochertyKSheppardMC
Hormonal regulation of thyrotrophin synthesis and secretion. Horm Metab Res Suppl (1987) 17:86–9.3481768
      
      
        300
        FranklynJAWoodDFBalfourNJRamsdenDBDochertyKSheppardMC. Modulation by oestrogen of thyroid hormone effects on thyrotrophin gene expression. J Endocrinol (1987) 115(1):53–9.10.1677/joe.0.11500532822833
      
      
        301
        FittsJMKleinRMPowersCA. Comparison of tamoxifen effects on the actions of triiodothyronine or growth hormone in the ovariectomized-hypothyroid rat. J Pharmacol Exp Ther (1998) 286(1):392–402.9655884
      
      
        302
        WyssMTJolivetRBuckAMagistrettiPJWeberB. In vivo evidence for lactate as a neuronal energy source. J Neurosci (2011) 31(20):7477–85.10.1523/jneurosci.0415-11.201121593331
      
      
        303
        Bouzier-SoreAKPellerinL. Unraveling the complex metabolic nature of astrocytes. Front Cell Neurosci (2013) 7:179.10.3389/fncel.2013.0017924130515
      
      
        304
        CruzNFDienelGA. High glycogen levels in brains of rats with minimal environmental stimuli: implications for metabolic contributions of working astrocytes. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab (2002) 22(12):1476–89.10.1097/01.wcb.0000034362.37277.c012468892
      
      
        305
        HeniMHennigeAMPeterASiegel-AxelDOrdelheideAMKrebsN
Insulin promotes glycogen storage and cell proliferation in primary human astrocytes. PLoS One (2011) 6(6):e21594.10.1371/journal.pone.002159421738722
      
      
        306
        MuhičMVardjanNChowdhuryHHZorecRKreftM. Insulin and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) modulate cytoplasmic glucose and glycogen levels but not glucose transport across the membrane in astrocytes. J Biol Chem (2015) 290(17):11167–76.10.1074/jbc.M114.62906325792745
      
      
        307
        BosierBBellocchioLMetna-LaurentMSoria-GomezEMatiasIHebert-ChatelainE
Astroglial CB(1) cannabinoid receptors regulate leptin signaling in mouse brain astrocytes. Mol Metab (2013) 2(4):393–404.10.1016/j.molmet.2013.08.00124327955
      
      
        308
        GolovkoMYMurphyEJ. Uptake and metabolism of plasma-derived erucic acid by rat brain. J Lipid Res (2006) 47(6):1289–97.10.1194/jlr.M600029-JLR20016525189
      
      
        309
        MurphyEJ. Blood–brain barrier and brain fatty acid uptake: role of arachidonic acid and PGE2. J Neurochem (2015) 135(5):845–8.10.1111/jnc.1328926383055
      
      
        310
        RosenbergerTAVillacresesNEHovdaJTBosettiFWeerasingheGWineRN
Rat brain arachidonic acid metabolism is increased by a 6-day intracerebral ventricular infusion of bacterial lipopolysaccharide. J Neurochem (2004) 88(5):1168–78.10.1046/j.1471-4159.2003.02246.x15009672
      
      
        311
        GolovkoMYFaergemanNJColeNBCastagnetPINussbaumRLMurphyEJ
Alpha-synuclein gene deletion decreases brain palmitate uptake and alters the palmitate metabolism in the absence of α-synuclein palmitate binding. Biochemistry (2005) 44(23):8251–9.10.1021/bi050213715938614
      
      
        312
        ShiraiKSaitoYYoshidaSHOMatsuokaN. Existence of lipoprotein lipase in rat brain microvessels. Tohoku J Exp Med (1986) 149(4):449–50.10.1620/tjem.149.4493775767
      
      
        313
        VilaróSCampsLReinaMPerez-ClausellJLloberaMOlivecronaT. Localization of lipoprotein lipase to discrete areas of the guinea pig brain. Brain Res (1990) 506(2):249–53.10.1016/0006-8993(90)91258-I2302565
      
      
        314
        SpectorAA. Plasma free fatty acid and lipoproteins as sources of polyunsaturated fatty acid for the brain. J Mol Neurosci (2001) 16(2):159–65.10.1385/JMN:16:2-3:15911478370
      
      
        315
        HamiltonJABrunaldiK. A model for fatty acid transport into the brain. J Mol Neurosci (2007) 33:12–7.10.1007/s12031-007-0050-317901540
      
      
        316
        WangHEckelRH
Lipoprotein lipase in the brain and nervous system. Annu Rev Nutr (2012) 32:147–60.10.1146/annurev-nutr-071811-15070322540257
      
      
        317
        EdmondJRobbinsRABergstromJDColeRAde VellisJ. Capacity for substrate utilization in oxidative metabolism by neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes from developing brain in primary culture. J Neurosci Res (1987) 18(4):551–61.10.1002/jnr.4901804073481403
      
      
        318
        Le FollCLevinBE. Fatty acid-induced astrocyte ketone production and the control of food intake. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol (2016) 310(11):R1186–92.10.1152/ajpregu.00113.201627122369
      
      
        319
        EdmondJHigaTAKorsakRABergnerEALeeWNP. Fatty acid transport and utilization for the developing brain. J Neurochem (1998) 70(3):1227–34.10.1046/j.1471-4159.1998.70031227.x9489745
      
      
        320
        ShahSN. Cytosolic 3-hydroxy-3-methyl glutaryl coenzyme a synthase in rat brain: properties and developmental change. Neurochem Res (1982) 7(11):1359–66.10.1007/BF009660646133227
      
      
        321
        CullingfordTEDolphinCTBhakooKKPeuchenSCanevariLClarkJB. Molecular cloning of rat mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase and detection of the corresponding mRNA and of those encoding the remaining enzymes comprising the ketogenic 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA cycle in central nervous system of suckling rat. Biochem J (1998) 329(Pt 2):373–81.9425122
      
      
        322
        HegardtFG. Mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase: a control enzyme in ketogenesis. Biochem J (1999) 338(Pt 3):569–82.10.1042/bj338056910051425
      
      
        323
        AuestadNKorsakRAMorrowJWEdmondJ
Fatty acid oxidation and ketogenesis by astrocytes in primary culture. J Neurochem (1991) 56(4):1376–86.10.1111/j.1471-4159.1991.tb11435.x2002348
      
      
        324
        MissonJPEdwardsMAYamamotoMCavinessVSJr. Identification of radial glial cells within the developing murine central nervous system: studies based upon a new immunohistochemical marker. Brain Res Dev Brain Res (1988) 44(1):95–108.10.1016/0165-3806(88)90121-63069243
      
      
        325
        HartfussEGalliRHeinsNGötzM
Characterization of CNS precursor subtypes and radial glia. Dev Biol (2001) 229(1):15–30.10.1006/dbio.2000.996211133151
      
      
        326
        NoctorSCFlintACWeissmanTAWongWSClintonBKKriegsteinAR. Dividing precursor cells of the embryonic cortical ventricular zone have morphological and molecular characteristics of radial glia. J Neurosci (2002) 22(8):3161–73.11943818
      
      
        327
        SongHStevensCFGageFH. Astroglia induce neurogenesis from adult neural stem cells. Nature (2002) 417(6884):39–44.10.1038/417039a11986659
      
      
        328
        PadillaSLCarmodyJSZeltserLM
Pomc-expressing progenitors give rise to antagonistic populations in hypothalamic feeding circuits. Nat Med (2010) 16(4):403–5.10.1038/nm.212620348924
      
      
        329
        McNayDEBrianconNKokoevaMVMaratos-FlierEFlierJS. Remodeling of the arcuate nucleus energy-balance circuit is inhibited in obese mice. J Clin Invest (2012) 122(1):142–52.10.1172/JCI4313422201680
      
      
        330
        Sousa-FerreiraLde AlmeidaLPCavadasC
Role of hypothalamic neurogenesis in feeding regulation. Trends Endocrinol Metab (2014) 25(2):80–8.10.1016/j.tem.2013.10.00524231724
      
      
        331
        ChangGQGaysinskayaVKaratayevOLeibowitzSF. Maternal high-fat diet and fetal programming: increased proliferation of hypothalamic peptide-producing neurons that increase risk for overeating and obesity. J Neurosci (2008) 28(46):12107–19.10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2642-08.200819005075
      
      
        332
        BlessEPYangJAcharyaKDNettlesSAVassolerFMByrnesEM
Adult neurogenesis in the female mouse hypothalamus: estradiol and high fat diet alter the generation of newborn neurons expressing estrogen receptor α. eNeuro (2016) 3(4).10.1523/ENEURO.0027-16.2016
      
      
        333
        LeeDAYooSPakTSalvatierraJVelardeEAjaS
Dietary and sex-specific factors regulate hypothalamic neurogenesis in young adult mice. Front Neurosci (2014) 8:157.10.3389/fnins.2014.0015724982613
      
      
        334
        OyarceKABongarzoneERNualartF. Unconventional neurogenic niches and neurogenesis modulation by vitamins. J Stem Cell Res Ther (2014) 4(3):184.10.4172/2157-7633.100018426203401
      
      
        335
        RobinsSCStewartIMcNayDETaylorVGiachinoCGoetzM
α-Tanycytes of the adult hypothalamic third ventricle include distinct populations of FGF-responsive neural progenitors. Nat Commun (2013) 4:2049.10.1038/ncomms304923804023
      
      
        336
        HajihosseiniMKLangheSDLana-ElolaEMorrisonHSparshottNKellyR
Localization and fate of Fgf10-expressing cells in the adult mouse brain implicate Fgf10 in control of neurogenesis. Mol Cell Neurosci (2008) 37(4):857–68.10.1016/j.mcn.2008.01.00818329286
      
      
        337
        GoodmanTHHajihosseiniMK
Hypothalamic tanycytes—masters and servants of metabolic, neuroendocrine, and neurogenic functions. Front Neurosci (2015) 9:38710.3389/fnins.2015.0038726578855
      
      
        338
        GarcíaMASalazarKMillánCRodríguezFMontecinosHCaprileT
Sodium vitamin C cotransporter SVCT2 is expressed in hypothalamic glial cells. Glia (2005) 50(1):32–47.10.1002/glia.2013315625716
      
      
        339
        HaanNGoodmanTHNadji-SamieiAStratfordCMRiceRAghaEE
Fgf10-expressing tanycytes add new neurons to the appetite/energy-balance regulating centres of the postnatal and adult hypothalamus. J Neurosci (2013) 33(14):6170–80.10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2437-12.201323554498
      
      
        340
        BookoutALde GrootMHMOwenBMLeeSGautronLLawrenceHL
FGF21 regulates circadian behavior and metabolism by acting on the nervous system. Nat Med (2013) 19(9):1147–52.10.1038/nm.324923933984
      
      
        341
        RyanKKKohliRGutierrez-AguilarRGaitondeSGWoodsSCSeeleyRJ. Fibroblast growth factor-19 action in the brain reduces food intake and body weight and improves glucose tolerance in male rats. Endocrinology (2013) 154(1):9–15.10.1210/en.2012-189123183168
      
      
        342
        LiangQZhongLZhangJWangYBornsteinSRTriggleCR
FGF21 maintains glucose homeostasis by mediating the cross talk between liver and brain during prolonged fasting. Diabetes (2014) 63(12):4064.10.2337/db14-054125024372
      
      
        343
        OwenBMMangelsdorfDJKliewerSA. Tissue-specific actions of the metabolic hormones FGF15/19 and FGF21. Trends Endocrinol Metab (2015) 26(1):22–9.10.1016/j.tem.2014.10.00225476453
      
      
        344
        SuzukiSLiAJAkaikeTImamuraT. Intracerebroventricular infusion of fibroblast growth factor-1 increases Fos immunoreactivity in periventricular astrocytes in rat hypothalamus. Neurosci Lett (2001) 300(1):29–32.10.1016/S0304-3940(01)01535-X11172932
      
      
        345
        KajitaniNHisaoka-NakashimaKOkada-TsuchiokaMHosoiMYokoeTMoriokaN
Fibroblast growth factor 2 mRNA expression evoked by amitriptyline involves extracellular signal-regulated kinase-dependent early growth response 1 production in rat primary cultured astrocytes. J Neurochem (2015) 135(1):27–37.10.1111/jnc.1324726183033
      
      
        346
        GarréJMYangGBukauskasFFBennettMVL. FGF-1 triggers pannexin-1 hemichannel opening in spinal astrocytes of rodents and promotes inflammatory responses in acute spinal cord slices. J Neurosci (2016) 36(17):4785–801.10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4195-15.201627122036
      
      
        347
        PierozanPBiasibettiHSchmitzFÁvilaHParisiMMBarbe-TuanaF
Quinolinic acid neurotoxicity: differential roles of astrocytes and microglia via FGF-2-mediated signaling in redox-linked cytoskeletal changes. Biochim Biophys Acta (2016) 1863(12):3001–14.10.1016/j.bbamcr.2016.09.01427663072
      
      
        348
        Pérez-MartínMCifuentesMGrondonaJMBermúdez-SilvaFJArrabalPMPérez-FígaresJM
Neurogenesis in explants from the walls of the lateral ventricle of adult bovine brain: role of endogenous IGF-1 as a survival factor. Eur J Neurosci (2003) 17(2):205–11.10.1046/j.1460-9568.2003.02432.x12542656
      
      
        349
        MigaudMBataillerMSeguraSDuittozAFranceschiniIPillonD. Emerging new sites for adult neurogenesis in the mammalian brain: a comparative study between the hypothalamus and the classical neurogenic zones. Eur J Neurosci (2010) 32(12):2042–52.10.1111/j.1460-9568.2010.07521.x21143659
      
      
        350
        LeeDABedontJLPakTWangHSongJMiranda-AnguloA
Tanycytes of the hypothalamic median eminence form a diet-responsive neurogenic niche. Nat Neurosci (2012) 15(5):700–2.10.1038/nn.307922446882
      
      
        351
        BlessEPReddyTAcharyaKDBeltzBSTetelMJ. Oestradiol and diet modulate energy homeostasis and hypothalamic neurogenesis in the adult female mouse. J Neuroendocrinol (2014) 26(11):805–16.10.1111/jne.1220625182179
      
      
        352
        BorgMLLemusMBReichenbachASelathuraiAOldfieldBJAndrewsZB
Hypothalamic neurogenesis is not required for the improved insulin sensitivity following exercise training. Diabetes (2014) 63(11):364710.2337/db13-176224898143
      
      
        353
        NiwaANishiboriMHamasakiSKoboriTLiuKWakeH
Voluntary exercise induces neurogenesis in the hypothalamus and ependymal lining of the third ventricle. Brain Struct Funct (2016) 221(3):1653–66.10.1007/s00429-015-0995-x25633473
      
      
        354
        BlackshawSLeeDAPakTYooS
Regulation of body weight and metabolism by tanycyte-derived neurogenesis in young adult mice. In: PfaffDChristenY, editors. Stem Cells in Neuroendocrinology. Cham: Springer International Publishing (2016). p. 51–67.
      
      
        355
        ClarkeLEBarresBA. Emerging roles of astrocytes in neural circuit development. Nat Rev Neurosci (2013) 14(5):311–21.10.1038/nrn348423595014
      
      
        356
        SierraABeccariSDiaz-AparicioIEncinasJMComeauSTremblayME. Surveillance, phagocytosis, and inflammation: how never-resting microglia influence adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Neural Plast (2014) 2014:610343.10.1155/2014/61034324772353
      
      
        357
        ParkHRParkMChoiJParkKYChungHYLeeJY. A high-fat diet impairs neurogenesis: involvement of lipid peroxidation and brain-derived neurotrophic factor. Neurosci Lett (2010) 482(3):235–9.10.1016/j.neulet.2010.07.04620670674
      
      
        358
        LindqvistAMohapelPBouterBFrielingsdorfHPizzoDBrundinP
High-fat diet impairs hippocampal neurogenesis in male rats. Eur J Neurol (2006) 13(12):1385–8.10.1111/j.1468-1331.2006.01500.x17116226
      
      
        359
        ParkHRKimJYParkKYLeeJ. Lipotoxicity of palmitic acid on neural progenitor cells and hippocampal neurogenesis. Toxicol Res (2011) 27(2):103–10.10.5487/TR.2011.27.2.10324278558
      
      
        360
        SnyderJSSoumierABrewerMPickelJCameronHA
Adult hippocampal neurogenesis buffers stress responses and depressive behavior. Nature (2011) 476(7361):458–61.10.1038/nature1028721814201
      
      
        361
        NokiaMSLensuSAhtiainenJPJohanssonPPKochLGBrittonSL
Physical exercise increases adult hippocampal neurogenesis in male rats provided it is aerobic and sustained. J Physiol (2016) 594(7):1855–73.10.1113/JP27155226844666
      
      
        362
        BouretSG. Nutritional programming of hypothalamic development: critical periods and windows of opportunity. Int J Obes Suppl (2012) 2(Suppl 2):S19–24.10.1038/ijosup.2012.1727152149
      
      
        363
        PerlmutterLSTweedleCDHattonGI. Neuronal/glial plasticity in the supraoptic dendritic zone: dendritic bundling and double synapse formation at parturition. Neuroscience (1984) 13(3):769–79.10.1016/0306-4522(84)90095-26527778
      
      
        364
        TheodosisDTPoulainDA. Evidence for structural plasticity in the supraoptic nucleus of the rat hypothalamus in relation to gestation and lactation. Neuroscience (1984) 11(1):183–93.10.1016/0306-4522(84)90222-76709185
      
      
        365
        TheodosisDTChapmanDBMontagneseCPoulainDAMorrisJF
Structural plasticity in the hypothalamic supraoptic nucleus at lactation affects oxytocin-, but not vasopressin-secreting neurones. Neuroscience (1986) 17(3):661–78.10.1016/0306-4522(86)90038-22422592
      
      
        366
        MarzbanFTweedleCDHattonGI. Reevaluation of the plasticity in the rat supraoptic nucleus after chronic dehydration using immunogold for oxytocin and vasopressin at the ultrastructural level. Brain Res Bull (1992) 28(5):757–66.10.1016/0361-9230(92)90256-W1617460
      
      
        367
        García-SeguraLMChowenJAPárduczANaftolinF. Gonadal hormones as promoters of structural synaptic plasticity: cellular mechanisms. Prog Neurobiol (1994) 44(3):279–307.10.1016/0301-0082(94)90042-67886228
      
      
        368
        BandeiraFLentRHerculano-HouzelS. Changing numbers of neuronal and non-neuronal cells underlie postnatal brain growth in the rat. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009) 106(33):14108–13.10.1073/pnas.080465010619666520
      
      
        369
        FreemanMR. Specification and morphogenesis of astrocytes. Science (2010) 330(6005):774.10.1126/science.119092821051628
      
      
        370
        AhimaRSKellyJElmquistJKFlierJS. Distinct physiologic and neuronal responses to decreased leptin and mild hyperleptinemia. Endocrinology (1999) 140(11):4923–31.10.1210/endo.140.11.710510537115
      
      
        371
        AhimaRSPrabakaranDFlierJS. Postnatal leptin surge and regulation of circadian rhythm of leptin by feeding. Implications for energy homeostasis and neuroendocrine function. J Clin Invest (1998) 101(5):1020–7.10.1172/JCI11769486972
      
      
        372
        RottkampDMRudenkoIAMaierMTRoshanbinSYulyaningsihEPerezL
Leptin potentiates astrogenesis in the developing hypothalamus. Mol Metab (2015) 4(11):881–9.10.1016/j.molmet.2015.08.00526629411
      
      
        373
        UdagawaJHashimotoRSuzukiHHattaTSotomaruYHiokiK
The role of leptin in the development of the cerebral cortex in mouse embryos. Endocrinology (2006) 147(2):647–58.10.1210/en.2005-079116282354
      
      
        374
        FisetteAAlquierT
AstroGenesis: and there was leptin on the sixth day. Mol Metab (2015) 4(11):755–7.10.1016/j.molmet.2015.09.00926629400
      
      
        375
        YuraSItohHSagawaNYamamotoHMasuzakiHNakaoK
Role of premature leptin surge in obesity resulting from intrauterine undernutrition. Cell Metab (2005) 1(6):371–8.10.1016/j.cmet.2005.05.00516054086
      
      
        376
        KirkSLSamuelssonAMArgentonMDhonyeHKalamatianosTPostonL
Maternal obesity induced by diet in rats permanently influences central processes regulating food intake in offspring. PLoS One (2009) 4(6):e5870.10.1371/journal.pone.000587019516909
      
      
        377
        ViverosMPDíazFMateosBRodríguezNChowenJA. Maternal deprivation induces a rapid decline in circulating leptin levels and sexually dimorphic modifications in hypothalamic trophic factors and cell turnover. Horm Behav (2010) 57(4–5):405–14.10.1016/j.yhbeh.2010.01.00920100487
      
      
        378
        HarryGJKraftAD. Microglia in the developing brain: a potential target with lifetime effects. Neurotoxicology (2012) 33(2):191–206.10.1016/j.neuro.2012.01.01222322212
      
      
        379
        SierraAAbiegaOShahrazANeumannH. Janus-faced microglia: beneficial and detrimental consequences of microglial phagocytosis. Front Cell Neurosci (2013) 7:6.10.3389/fncel.2013.0000623386811
      
      
        380
        LenzKMNugentBMHaliyurRMcCarthyMM. Microglia are essential to masculinization of brain and behavior. J Neurosci (2013) 33(7):2761.10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1268-12.201323407936
      
      
        381
        PintoSRoseberryAGLiuHDianoSShanabroughMCaiX
Rapid rewiring of arcuate nucleus feeding circuits by leptin. Science (2004) 304(5667):110.10.1126/science.108945915064421
      
      
        382
        HorvathTLGaoXB
Input organization and plasticity of hypocretin neurons: possible clues to obesity’s association with insomnia. Cell Metab (2005) 1(4):279–86.10.1016/j.cmet.2005.03.00316054072
      
      
        383
        GyengesiELiuZWD’AgostinoGGanGHorvathTLGaoXB
Corticosterone regulates synaptic input organization of POMC and NPY/AgRP neurons in adult mice. Endocrinology (2010) 151(11):5395–402.10.1210/en.2010-068120843996
      
      
        384
        HorvathTLSarmanBGarcía-CáceresCEnrioriPJSotonyiPShanabroughM
Synaptic input organization of the melanocortin system predicts diet-induced hypothalamic reactive gliosis and obesity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010) 107(33):14875–80.10.1073/pnas.100428210720679202
      
      
        385
        BenaniAHryhorczukCGouazéAFioramontiXBrenachotXGuissardC
Food intake adaptation to dietary fat involves PSA-dependent rewiring of the arcuate melanocortin system in mice. J Neurosci (2012) 32(35):11970.10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0624-12.201222933782
      
      
        386
        BonfantiLTheodosisDT. Polysialic acid and activity-dependent synapse remodeling. Cell Adh Migr (2009) 3(1):43–50.10.4161/cam.3.1.725819372729
      
      
        387
        BolboreaMLaran-ChichMPRasriKHildebrandtHGovitrapongPSimonneauxV
Melatonin controls photoperiodic changes in tanycyte vimentin and neural cell adhesion molecule expression in the Djungarian hamster (Phodopus sungorus). Endocrinology (2011) 152(10):3871–83.10.1210/en.2011-103921846800
      
      
        388
        García-CáceresCFuente-MartínEBurgos-RamosEGranadoMFragoLMBarriosV
Differential acute and chronic effects of leptin on hypothalamic astrocyte morphology and synaptic protein levels. Endocrinology (2011) 152(5):1809–18.10.1210/en.2010-125221343257
      
      
        389
        AndersonCMSwansonRA. Astrocyte glutamate transport: review of properties, regulation, and physiological functions. Glia (2000) 32(1):1–14.10.1002/1098-1136(200010)32:1&lt;1:AID-GLIA10&gt;3.0.CO;2-W10975906
      
      
        390
        ParpuraVBasarskyTALiuFJeftinijaKJeftinijaSHaydonPG. Glutamate-mediated astrocyte-neuron signalling. Nature (1994) 369(6483):744–7.10.1038/369744a07911978
      
      
        391
        AraqueAParpuraVSanzgiriRPHaydonPG
Glutamate-dependent astrocyte modulation of synaptic transmission between cultured hippocampal neurons. Eur J Neurosci (1998) 10(6):2129–42.10.1046/j.1460-9568.1998.00221.x9753099
      
      
        392
        AraqueASanzgiriRPParpuraVHaydonPG
Calcium elevation in astrocytes causes an NMDA receptor-dependent increase in the frequency of miniature synaptic currents in cultured hippocampal neurons. J Neurosci (1998) 18(17):6822–9.9712653
      
      
        393
        HalassaMMFellinTHaydonPG. Tripartite synapses: roles for astrocytic purines in the control of synaptic physiology and behavior. Neuropharmacology (2009) 57(4):343–6.10.1016/j.neuropharm.2009.06.03119577581
      
      
        394
        YangLQiYYangY. Astrocytes control food intake by inhibiting AGRP neuron activity via adenosine A1 receptors. Cell Rep (2015) 11(5):798–807.10.1016/j.celrep.2015.04.00225921535
      
      
        395
        BélangerMMagistrettiPJ. The role of astroglia in neuroprotection. Dialogues Clin Neurosci (2009) 11(3):281–95.19877496
      
      
        396
        BarretoGEGonzalezJTorresYMoralesL. Astrocytic-neuronal crosstalk: implications for neuroprotection from brain injury. Neurosci Res (2011) 71(2):107–13.10.1016/j.neures.2011.06.00421693140
      
      
        397
        ChenZTrappBD
Microglia and neuroprotection. J Neurochem (2016) 136:10–7.10.1111/jnc.1306225693054
      
      
        398
        JhaMKLeeWHSukK. Functional polarization of neuroglia: implications in neuroinflammation and neurological disorders. Biochem Pharmacol (2016) 103:1–16.10.1016/j.bcp.2015.11.00326556658
      
      
        399
        De SouzaCTAraujoEPBordinSAshimineRZollnerRLBoscheroAC
Consumption of a fat-rich diet activates a proinflammatory response and induces insulin resistance in the hypothalamus. Endocrinology (2005) 146(10):4192–9.10.1210/en.2004-152016002529
      
      
        400
        ZhangXZhangGZhangHKarinMBaiHCaiD
Hypothalamic IKKβ/NF-κB and ER stress link overnutrition to energy imbalance and obesity. Cell (2008) 135(1):61–73.10.1016/j.cell.2008.07.04318854155
      
      
        401
        CalegariVCTorsoniASVanzelaECAraújoEPMorariJZoppiCC
Inflammation of the hypothalamus leads to defective pancreatic islet function. J Biol Chem (2011) 286(15):12870–80.10.1074/jbc.M110.17302121257748
      
      
        402
        Tapia-GonzálezSGarcía-SeguraLMTena-SempereMFragoLMCastellanoJMFuente-MartínE
Activation of microglia in specific hypothalamic nuclei and the cerebellum of adult rats exposed to neonatal overnutrition. J Neuroendocrinol (2011) 23(4):365–70.10.1111/j.1365-2826.2011.02113.x21314736
      
      
        403
        MilanskiMArrudaAPCoopeAIgnacio-SouzaLMNunezCERomanEA
Inhibition of hypothalamic inflammation reverses diet-induced insulin resistance in the liver. Diabetes (2012) 61(6):1455–62.10.2337/db11-039022522614
      
      
        404
        MorariJAnheGFNascimentoLFde MouraRFRazolliDSolonC
Fractalkine (CX3CL1) is involved in the early activation of hypothalamic inflammation in experimental obesity. Diabetes (2014) 63(11):3770.10.2337/db13-149524947351
      
      
        405
        CaiD. Neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration in overnutrition-induced diseases. Trends Endocrinol Metab (2013) 24(1):40–7.10.1016/j.tem.2012.11.00323265946
      
      
        406
        ChengLYuYSzaboAWuYWangHCamerD
Palmitic acid induces central leptin resistance and impairs hepatic glucose and lipid metabolism in male mice. J Nutr Biochem (2015) 26(5):541–8.10.1016/j.jnutbio.2014.12.01125724108
      
      
        407
        Fuente-MartinEGarcía-CáceresCDíazFArgente-ArizonPGranadoMBarriosV
Hypothalamic inflammation without astrogliosis in response to high sucrose intake is modulated by neonatal nutrition in male rats. Endocrinology (2013) 154(7):2318–30.10.1210/en.2012-219623671260
      
      
        408
        GaoYTschopMHLuquetS. Hypothalamic tanycytes: gatekeepers to metabolic control. Cell Metab (2014) 19(2):173–5.10.1016/j.cmet.2014.01.00824506860
      
      
        409
        MorselliECriolloARodriguez-NavasCCleggDJ. Chronic high fat diet consumption impairs metabolic health of male mice. Inflamm Cell Signal (2014) 1(6):e561.10.14800/ics.56126046098
      
      
        410
        MorselliEFrankAPPalmerBFRodriguez-NavasCCriolloACleggDJ. A sexually dimorphic hypothalamic response to chronic high-fat diet consumption. Int J Obes (2016) 40(2):206–9.10.1038/ijo.2015.11426073655
      
      
        411
        MorganTEXieZGoldsmithSYoshidaTLanzreinASStoneD
The mosaic of brain glial hyperactivity during normal ageing and its attenuation by food restriction. Neuroscience (1999) 89(3):687–99.10.1016/S0306-4522(98)00334-010199605
      
      
        412
        MacDonaldLRadlerMEPaoliniAGKentS. Calorie restriction attenuates LPS-induced sickness behavior and shifts hypothalamic signaling pathways to an anti-inflammatory bias. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol (2011) 301(1):R172.10.1152/ajpregu.00057.201121525175
      
      
        413
        Loncarevic-VasiljkovicNPesicVTodorovicSPopicJSmiljanicKMilanovicD
Caloric restriction suppresses microglial activation and prevents neuroapoptosis following cortical injury in rats. PLoS One (2012) 7(5):e37215.10.1371/journal.pone.003721522615943
      
      
        414
        RadlerMEHaleMWKentS. Calorie restriction attenuates lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced microglial activation in discrete regions of the hypothalamus and the subfornical organ. Brain Behav Immun (2014) 38:13–24.10.1016/j.bbi.2013.11.01424291211
      
      
        415
        RadlerMEWrightBJWalkerFRHaleMWKentS. Calorie restriction increases lipopolysaccharide-induced neuropeptide Y immunolabeling and reduces microglial cell area in the arcuate hypothalamic nucleus. Neuroscience (2015) 285:236–47.10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.11.01425446356
      
      
        416
        YiCXAl-MassadiODonelanELehtiMWeberJRessC
Exercise protects against high-fat diet-induced hypothalamic inflammation. Physiol Behav (2012) 106(4):485–90.10.1016/j.physbeh.2012.03.02122483785
      
      
        417
        GlezerISimardARRivestS. Neuroprotective role of the innate immune system by microglia. Neuroscience (2007) 147(4):867–83.10.1016/j.neuroscience.2007.02.05517459594
      
      
        418
        KoflerJWileyCA. Microglia: key innate immune cells of the brain. Toxicol Pathol (2011) 39(1):103–14.10.1177/019262331038761921078923
      
      
        419
        ValdearcosMRobbleeMMBenjaminDINomuraDKXuAWKoliwadSK. Microglia dictate the impact of saturated fat consumption on hypothalamic inflammation and neuronal function. Cell Rep (2014) 9(6):2124–38.10.1016/j.celrep.2014.11.01825497089
      
      
        420
        PinteauxEInoueWSchmidtLMolina-HolgadoFRothwellNJLuheshiGN
Leptin induces interleukin-1β release from rat microglial cells through a caspase 1 independent mechanism. J Neurochem (2007) 102(3):826–33.10.1111/j.1471-4159.2007.04559.x17419800
      
      
        421
        PanWHsuchouHXuCWuXBouretSGKastinAJ
Astrocytes modulate distribution and neuronal signaling of leptin in the hypothalamus of obese A(vy) mice. J Mol Neurosci (2011) 43(3):478–84.10.1007/s12031-010-9470-621086065
      
      
        422
        GuptaSKnightAGGuptaSKellerJNBruce-KellerAJ
Saturated long chain fatty acids activate inflammatory signaling in astrocytes. J Neurochem (2012) 120(6):1060–71.10.1111/j.1471-4159.2012.07660.x22248073
      
      
        423
        LafranceVInoueWKanBLuheshiGN. Leptin modulates cell morphology and cytokine release in microglia. Brain Behav Immun (2010) 24(3):358–65.10.1016/j.bbi.2009.11.00319922787
      
      
        424
        SpenceRDHambyMEUmedaEItohNDuSWisdomAJ
Neuroprotection mediated through estrogen receptor-α in astrocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011) 108(21):8867–72.10.1073/pnas.110383310821555578
      
      
        425
        HiguchiSIrieKMishimaSArakiMOhjiMShirakawaA
The cannabinoid 1-receptor silent antagonist O-2050 attenuates preference for high-fat diet and activated astrocytes in mice. J Pharmacol Sci (2010) 112(3):369–72.10.1254/jphs.09326SC20168044
      
      
        426
        HiguchiSIrieKYamaguchiRKatsukiMArakiMOhjiM
Hypothalamic 2-arachidonoylglycerol regulates multistage process of high-fat diet preferences. PLoS One (2012) 7(6):e38609.10.1371/journal.pone.003860922737214
      
    
  
