oai:pubmedcentral.nih.gov:53626642017-04-04springeropenpmc-open
Fate mapping reveals origins and dynamics of monocytes and tissue macrophages under homeostasis

    
      Introduction
      The steadily rising prevalence of obesity incorporates a major health issue because it is attended by fatal obesity-associated disorders including not only the development of type 2 diabetes and fatty liver diseases but also the rising incidence for certain cancer entities [7, 54]. In the first instance, obesity alters whole body metabolism that frequently results in insulin resistance [5]. Insulin is produced by the pancreatic beta cells in response to rising blood glucose levels, thereby leading to glucose uptake in insulin responsive organs. Excessive glucose is stored in the white adipose tissue (WAT) as lipids and in the liver as glycogen that can be converted back to glucose during fasting or periods of increased energy demands. All these metabolic processes and many more are controlled by insulin [93]. The actions of insulin are mediated via binding to the insulin receptor (IR) [5]. The IR and the homologous insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) are receptor tyrosine kinases that use adaptor molecules for their downstream signaling [48]. These molecules belong to the insulin receptor substrate (IRS) family of proteins that upon engagement of the IR or IGF1R are tyrosine phosphorylated further leading to phosphatidylinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and AKT activation. In diabetes patients, insulin action is impaired. While type 1 diabetes patients exhibit beta cell/insulin loss due to autoimmune reactions against the pancreas, type 2 diabetes develops as a consequence of insulin resistance that is frequent in obese patients. In obesity, the compromised glucose uptake into metabolic organs induces hyperglycemia in turn accelerating insulin production in beta cells. The excessive insulin production can partly compensate for decreased insulin sensitivity but progresses to increased beta cell mass and ultimately to beta cell death. How obesity facilitates the development of insulin resistance has been discovered over the last decade. Obesity has been accepted as low-grade inflammatory state that is also known as metaflammation [38]. Metaflammation is mainly derived from innate immune cells, e.g., macrophages whose derivation, fate, and functional consequences are discussed in this review.
    
    
      Tissue resident macrophages
      Macrophages are cells of the innate immune system that populate every organ. They display great functional plasticity and are required for maintenance of tissue homeostasis, immunity against invading pathogens, and tissue repair. Different organs harbor different specialized tissue resident macrophages, which include red pulp and marginal zone macrophages in the spleen, microglia in the brain, peritoneal macrophages, osteoclasts in the bone, alveolar macrophages in the lung, and the two major metabolic tissue macrophage subsets in the liver and adipose tissue—liver Kupffer cells and adipose tissue macrophages, respectively [73]. Certain tissue macrophage subsets populate their organs during embryogenesis, while in adulthood, tissue resident macrophage subsets are replenished by monocytes that are recruited from the bone marrow [22]. The two major subsets of monocytes are termed inflammatory and patrolling monocytes. They are distinguished by a defined panel of surface markers and chemokine receptors and have distinct chemotactic properties. Inflammatory monocytes are C-C chemokine receptor type 2 (CCR2) and lymphocyte antigen 6 c (Ly6C) positive, whereas patrolling monocytes are CCR2 and Ly6C negative, but express high levels of CX3 chemokine receptor 1 (CX3CR1). Expression of these different chemokine receptors allows them to follow diverging chemokine gradients. Under steady state, patrolling monocytes crawl along the vasculature where they function as immune sentinels. They can enter tissues through expression of CX3CR1 and differentiate into tissue resident cells with dendritic cell- and macrophage-like features [21, 86]. The degree of macrophage turnover under homeostatic conditions varies between organs [22]. Inflammatory monocytes are recruited to tissues in response to infection or tissue damage via chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 2 (CCL-2). In the absence of inflammation, they remain in the blood circulation [21].
    
    
      Macrophage ontogeny
      Precursors of several tissue macrophage subsets emerge during embryogenesis. Hematopoiesis during embryonic development occurs at two sites in two stages—first extra-embryonically in the yolk sac and later on in the fetal liver [22]. Hematopoiesis in the yolk sac was termed “primitive” and thought to solely preserve macrophage pools during embryogenesis, while tissue resident macrophages are derived from adult hematopoietic stem cells (HSC). However, fate-mapping studies revealed that numerous tissue resident macrophage populations are of prenatal origin and emerge from the yolk sac or the fetal liver. Microglia for example were shown to originate from the yolk sac, while Langerhans cells are mainly of fetal liver origin [23]. The use of (Myb-deficient) mice, which lack the bone marrow hematopoietic stem cell compartment, shed more light on the development of tissue resident macrophages [96]. These mice still develop tissue resident macrophage populations including Langerhans cells, Kupffer cells, microglia, lung alveolar, splenic red pulp, and peritoneal macrophages, indicating that yolk sac-derived progenitors give rise to several long-lasting tissue macrophage subsets beyond embryonic development [124]. Notably, these macrophage populations are maintained during adulthood under homeostatic conditions owing to their self-renewal potential.
      It is an ongoing debate whether determination to the distinct tissue resident macrophage subsets occurs during embryonic development or is induced by signals from the local environment once macrophage populate their final tissue. On the one hand, some findings support the concept that macrophage precursors could already be committed to give rise to a certain subset by the time they enter the circulation to populate their target organ. Recent studies for example suggested that microglia are derived from a distinct yolk sac precursor, while other tissue resident macrophages derive from embryonic hematopoietic precursors [36, 98]. Other studies in contrast provided evidence that cues from the local tissue environment are crucial for differentiation into the distinct tissue resident macrophage subsets. By comparing different tissue resident macrophage populations, it has been assessed that tissue-specific factors shape the chromatin and enhancer landscape of macrophages thus enabling the transcription of subset-specific genes [27, 59]. Retinoic acid for example drives the differentiation of peritoneal macrophages by inducing the expression of the transcription factor GATA-6, which in turn activates a peritoneal macrophage-specific transcriptional program that is crucial for maintenance and functionality of these cells [81, 90]. The idea of in situ differentiation is supported by findings that tissue resident macrophages originate from a common erythro-myeloid progenitor (EMP) in the yolk sac, which populates the fetal liver before entering the blood stream to give rise to tissue resident macrophages [25]. Using single-cell RNA sequencing, a recent study investigated the chronology of macrophage differentiation during embryogenesis. EMPs give rise to premature macrophages that share a common gene expression signature. Induction of specific expression profiles is initiated during organogenesis when pre-mature macrophages enter the tissue [65].
    
    
      Polarization states of macrophages
      Tissue resident macrophages express a multitude of pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) that enable them to sense a wide range of microbial molecules and danger signals. Upon pathogen encounter, they induce a cascade that signals the quality of infection or danger, induces an inflammatory state, and recruits other immune cells to the site of infection [44]. Together with neutrophils, they produce bactericidal molecules and phagocytose pathogens to terminate the infection. After the infection has been cleared, they resolute inflammation by anti-inflammatory cytokines and lipid mediators and govern tissue repair by phagocytosing debris and promoting regeneration of extracellular matrix [73].
      Macrophages exhibit a high degree of functional plasticity, and the nature of an inflammatory trigger as well as the local cytokine milieu will determine the respective macrophage polarization and its functional state. In this regard, early on, the distinction between classically activated and alternatively activated or—in analogy to the Th1/Th2 nomenclature of T cells—M1 and M2 macrophages has been made [64]. In vitro, these subsets can be induced by incubation with interferon gamma (IFNγ) and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or interleukin-4 (IL-4), respectively. The M1/M2 nomenclature was in particular used to classify macrophages into cells with pro-inflammatory or anti-inflammatory properties or certain effector functions. The following studies revealed that distinct pro- or anti-inflammatory stimuli elicit distinct transcriptomic profiles, which led to the proposal of the spectrum model or more recently the multidimensional model [24]. However, many important findings were made using the aforementioned stimuli. Also, many classical M1 and M2 markers are still used to assess the functional state of macrophages in vivo. We thus will refer to macrophages with pro-inflammatory properties as Mpro and macrophages with anti-inflammatory properties as Manti.
      Triggers like the Th1 cytokine IFNγ and/or toll-like receptor (TLR) ligands such as LPS initiate a pro-inflammatory response that equips macrophages to fight bacterial infections [64]. These stimuli activate signaling cascades that result in a global transcriptional reprogramming. In this context, signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 1 and 2 and nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-κB) are key transcription factors of IFNγ and TLR signaling, respectively [60]. Pro-inflammatory macrophages (Mpro) generally have inflammatory properties and are crucial for fighting bacterial infections and immunity against tumors. However, excessive activation can also result in tissue damage and autoimmunity. They present antigen and produce bactericidal agents such as reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitric oxide (NO). The latter is synthesized by inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) from arginine. They furthermore secrete a multitude of inflammatory cytokines including tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα), IL1-β, IL-6, IL-12, and IL-18 [63].
      Three major pro-inflammatory cytokines are TNFα, Il-1β, and IL-6. TNFα is one of the first cytokines secreted by macrophages during infection and crucially involved in septic shock. It activates the vascular endothelium and initiates the acute phase in the liver. IL-6 also activates the acute phase and induces fever. In addition, it acts on lymphocytes and activates cytotoxic cells or stimulates differentiation of plasma cells. Depending on the signaling pathways that are activated upon receptor binding, IL-6 can also have anti-inflammatory properties [68]. IL-1β is a strong pyrogen, but in addition can induce the secretion of prostaglandins in the central nervous system. Notably, IL-1β and TNFα are both potent inducer of IL-6 and thereby amplify the inflammatory cascade [17]. IL-12 induces Th1 differentiation and together with IL-18 induces IFNγ production by Th1 and natural killer (NK) cells which in turn acts on macrophages in a feed forward loop [63].
      Alternatively activated macrophages (Manti) were initially described during helminth infections and exhibit an anti-inflammatory phenotype. In vitro, they can be induced by the Th2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-13. Similarly as described for pro-inflammatory stimuli, binding of IL-4 to its receptor will result in a global transcriptional reprogramming. One of the key transcription factors mediating these changes is STAT6. It acts in concert with peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1-alpha (PGC-1α) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma and delta (PPARγ and PPARδ) which, as will be discussed below, are particularly involved in reprogramming cellular energy metabolism [60]. Manti are important players during helminth infection, response to tissue damage, resolution of inflammation, and wound healing, but can also foster fibrosis and tumor growth [26]. Their most important effector molecules include arginase, lectins, scavenger receptors and the cytokines IL-10 and the IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL1-RA). Arginase converts arginine to ornithine, which in turn is used during tissue repair for polyamine and collagen synthesis. Scavenger receptors and lectins mediate clearance of debris and apoptotic cells during resolution of inflammation, while IL-10 and IL-1RA are potent suppressors of inflammation [26, 63].
    
    
      Macrophage metabolism
      The differential use of arginine was an early indication that pro- and anti-inflammatory triggers induce diverging metabolic changes in macrophages. Over the last years, a series of discoveries have highlighted a tight linkage between cellular metabolism and macrophage effector functions [83]. While distinct metabolic features of many immune cells were described, we are just beginning to understand how nutrient availability can shape immune responses. In the following, we will briefly summarize these findings with a focus on glycolysis, β-oxidation, and amino acid metabolism.
      Glycolysis describes the sequential breakdown of glucose to pyruvate, which is either converted to lactate and secreted or imported into mitochondria. When shuttled into mitochondria, pyruvate is converted to acetyl-coenzyme A (CoA), which enters the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle by condensation with oxaloacetate. The TCA cycle generates NADH and FADH2, which are used to generate ATP via oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). Apart from glycolysis, multiple catabolic pathways converge into the TCA cycle such as β-oxidation and glutaminolysis. β-Oxidation of fatty acids generates acetyl-CoA, while glutamine can enter the TCA by sequential conversion to α-ketoglutarate [15]. Apart from its central role in catabolism, the TCA cycle also serves as a metabolic hub that can redirect its intermediates for anabolic reactions when required. Citrate for example can be exported from mitochondria and cleaved to acetyl-CoA and oxaloacetate by ATP-citrate lyase. Acetyl-CoA in turn serves as a precursor for fatty acid or cholesterol biosynthesis and is substrate for acetylation reactions in the cytoplasm and the nucleus. OXPHOS is the most effective way for cells to generate ATP and is used by most quiescent cell types to cover their energetic demands [15]. OXPHOS, however, requires oxygen and has rather slow ATP generation kinetics. Thus, under hypoxic conditions or conditions of increased ATP demand, cells switch from OXPHOS to glycolysis to generate ATP. This phenomenon—glycolytic activity under normoxic conditions—is termed Warburg effect after its discoverer Otto Warburg. Initially discovered in cancer cells, proliferating cells or cells with high anabolic demands such as the developing embryo, epithelial cells, or activated immune cells exhibit Warburg metabolism [108]. Switching to glycolysis does not only allow for fast ATP generation, but also enables cells to diverge glycolytic intermediates into anabolic pathways such as amino acid, lipid, or nucleotide biosynthesis, instead of oxidizing them via TCA and OXPHOS [108].
      Increased glycolysis was described early on in LPS-stimulated macrophages [83]. A series of recent studies has underpinned that commitment to Warburg metabolism equips macrophages to fulfill their effector functions such as production of ROS or NO, phagocytosis, and secretion of inflammatory mediators in the context of bacterial infection. Upon activation with pro-inflammatory stimuli like LPS or IFNγ, macrophages undergo metabolic reprogramming and exhibit increased rates of glycolysis and decreased OXPHOS. By diverting ATP generation from OXPHOS to glycolysis, mitochondria are available for ROS production [115]. Furthermore, instead of being used for ATP production, citrate is exported from mitochondria and used for fatty acid biosynthesis [42]. To compensate for decreased conversion of citrate to α-ketoglutarate, glutamine is funneled into the TCA via anaplerosis to α-ketoglutarate [102]. The molecular mechanisms driving these changes are just being uncovered. Some are NF-κB dependent: LPS for example induces PFKFB3, which increases glycolytic flux by generating fructose-2,6-bisphosphate [91]. Moreover, the NF-κB responsive gene hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF1α) was identified as another central metabolic regulator in response to LPS [12]. HIF1α is an essential mediator of the hypoxic response, partly by promoting a shift from OXPHOS to glycolysis. Under normoxic conditions, it is constantly degraded by the proteasome and only stabilized under hypoxic conditions. Ubiquitination and subsequent degradation of HIF1α are initiated by hydroxylation of proline residues by prolyl hydroxylases (PHDs). In certain cancer cells that exhibit Warburg metabolism, inhibition of PHDs can lead to HIF1α stabilization under normoxic conditions [97]. A similar effect was observed in response to LPS stimulation. In this context, ROS, succinate accumulation and iron were shown to contribute to PHD inhibition [76, 99, 102]. While ROS and succinate inhibit PHD activity, PHDs require iron as cofactor for the hydroxylation reaction. Indeed, ferritin decreases iron availability to PHDs after LPS stimulation and thereby downregulates PHD-dependent HIF1α hydroxylation [99]. While HIF1α sustains proliferation in cancer cells [97], it upregulates glycolysis [12], and also specifically boosts IL-1β expression [102] in response to LPS stimulation. As described before, arginine metabolism to citrulline and NO is a key effector function of pro-inflammatory macrophages. Indeed, changes in glutamine metabolism upon stimulation supply arginine and boost NO production by iNOS [47].
      While LPS-activated macrophages mainly rely on glycolysis, IL-4-activated macrophages exhibit an oxidative phenotype [47]. Upon IL-4 stimulation, macrophages increase fatty acid uptake, β-oxidation, and OXPHOS [109]. These metabolic rearrangements are initiated by STAT6 and PGC-1β. In concert with PPARγ and PPARδ, they induce mitochondrial biogenesis and expression of genes that are involved in β-oxidation and OXPHOS [79]. These studies also highlighted a role for PPARs in the control of metabolic disease and maintaining insulin sensitivity. Furthermore, recent studies have highlighted the tight connection between macrophage metabolism and its effector functions in helminth infection and identified lysosomal lipolysis as alternative pathway to foster β-oxidation. Notably, the authors of this study showed that blockade of lysosomal liposysis during H. polygyrus infection results in defective clearance of the pathogen and inhibits commitment to OXPHOS by macrophages [41]. IL-4-stimulated macrophages maintain an intact active TCA cycle and generate ATP mainly via OXPHOS. While changes in β-oxidation are the most striking metabolic adaptations in response to IL-4, metabolomic studies also revealed that glycolysis as well as glutaminolysis contribute to TCA activity [47]. Notably, glutamine deprivation inhibits Manti macrophage induction in vitro [47], whereas inhibition of glycolysis only affects a small subset of IL-4 target genes [11]. Thus, while macrophages undergo drastic metabolic changes in response to pro- and anti-inflammatory triggers, like LPS and IL-4, respectively, their diverse effector functions and locations differentially affect whole body metabolism underlining their central role in organismal physiology.
    
    
      Adipose tissue macrophages and Kupffer cells in homeostasis
      Besides their role in sensing infection and tissue damage, tissue resident macrophages have important homeostatic and trophic functions. Limiting inflammation and maintaining tissue homeostasis are extra crucial functions of the liver resident Kupffer cells (KC) and adipose tissue macrophages (ATM). In obesity, insulin resistance develops as a consequence of metaflammation in which elevated circulating levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNFα and IL-6 negatively affect the insulin signaling cascade [37]. The main source for these inflammatory mediators in obesity is hepatic and WAT macrophages [122]. Macrophages adapt in their residing tissue to local circumstances and exert numerous effector functions such as phagocytosis and cytokine production. In the obese state, macrophages in the WAT and the liver are major players in regulating metaflammation. Macrophages sense factors derived from pathogens or from cells belonging to innate and adaptive systems as well as from specialized cells in the affected tissue. We will refer here on the impact of ATM and liver-derived KC in the development of obesity-associated insulin resistance.
    
    
      Adipose tissue macrophages
      Adipose tissue is one of the major metabolic organs that stores excess nutrients as triacylglycerides and releases fatty acids in the fasted state, which serve as energy source for peripheral tissues. Under homeostatic conditions, adipose tissue is populated with macrophages that exhibit a Manti like phenotype and govern adipocyte lipid metabolism by secreting factors such as IL-10 and catecholamines. IL-10 enhances adipocyte insulin sensitivity and lipogenesis [62], whereas catecholamines trigger lipolysis in adipocytes [75]. Under conditions of excessive lipolysis, they control release of fatty acids into the circulation by serving as buffer [55]. While the ontogeny of other tissue macrophage subsets is well studied, less is known about ATM. Under inflammatory conditions, monocytes enter adipose tissue in a CCR2-dependent manner [62]. The origin of ATMs under homeostatic conditions is a matter of debate. Interestingly, WAT contains a pool of c-Kit+/Lin−/Sca-1+ cells that share features of hematopoietic stem cells [10]. This population fails to populate bone marrow in non-irradiated mice, but is capable of replenishing the innate immune cell pool in adipose tissue [85]. ATMs might thus be regenerated in situ independent of the bone marrow.
      A pioneering study from Hotamisligil and Spiegelman identified adipocytes as source of TNFα in the WAT that ultimately impaired insulin signaling in obesity [39]. However, findings by Xu et al. demonstrated that mainly the stromal vascular fraction of the obese WAT expresses inflammatory cytokines [122]. Currently, the view that the majority of other cells than adipocytes in the obese WAT are macrophages is supported, whereas in lean conditions, these cells represent approximately 10% [112]. While in lean WAT, mainly alternative Manti like macrophages express anti-inflammatory molecules, in obese, WAT macrophage polarization is shifted towards a pro-inflammatory Mpro like phenotype. The increased abundance and activation of macrophages in the obese WAT can be accounted by adipose tissue stress that includes elevated amounts of free fatty acids and LPS [28]. LPS, which is presumably microbiome derived, is not only abundant in WAT, but also found in the circulation of obese individuals [8]. LPS and fatty acids such as palmitate activate TLR4 signaling in ATMs that polarizes them towards Mpro macrophages [13, 50]. Subsequently, these stimuli trigger expression of TNFα and IL-6 in ATMs that compromise insulin action not only locally in the WAT, but also systemically since they are released to circulation [82]. Thus, it is tempting to speculate that metaflammation is a consequence of local innate immune response in the WAT that spills over via the blood to other organs due to the blood soluble factors involved. Of note, caloric restriction-induced weight loss including improvements in systemic insulin sensitivity and whole body glucose metabolism ameliorated metaflammation in the liver but not in adipose tissue suggesting that long-lived ATMs maintain WAT inflammation [95].
      The Manti like ATMs in lean WAT express the cell surface marker CD206 and exhibit anti-inflammatory properties such as IL-10 expression. These Manti like ATMs synergize with regulatory T cells (Treg) and innate type 2 lymphoid cells (ILC2) to maintain the anti-inflammatory WAT environment [18, 70]. Tregs, T cells, ILC2 cells, and even adipocytes provide anti-inflammatory IL-4, IL-13, and IL-33 in the lean WAT to keep ATMs in an Manti like state [49, 117]. In the course of obesity, monocyte recruitment as well as local proliferation gives rise to novel ATMs that polarize towards a pro-inflammatory Mpro like phenotype that express the surface marker CD11c [51, 62, 113]. Abruptly, the WAT environment has changed from anti- to pro-inflammatory conditions indicated by the lack of Treg cells and infiltration of cytotoxic and Th1 T cells as well as NK cells [78, 114]. Besides the already mentioned Mpro polarizing LPS, T cells and NK cells in the obese WAT provide IFNγ, which sustains polarization towards the Mpro phenotype [114]. ATMs accumulate intracellular lipids not only via phagocytosis of dying adipocytes resulting in crown like structures in the WAT, but also via fatty acid transporter-mediated uptake [123]. The metabolism of obese ATMs has changed to glycolysis, which is necessary for the production of nitric oxide by iNos to increase pro-inflammatory macrophage responses [20]. Mpro macrophages take up glucose via glucose transporter 1 that further triggers Mpro polarization [19].
      Therefore, it is not surprising that the polarizing environment in the obese WAT in vivo cannot be completely recapitulated in vitro in bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDM) [123]. For instance, upregulation of CD11c expression is not induced by sole LPS and IFNγ treatment in BMDM, but can be restored by coculture with adipocytes [56]. Treatment with high glucose, insulin, and palmitate induces a Mpro like phenotype in BMDM culture that releases inflammatory cytokines [56]. Consistently, insulin receptor inactivation in macrophages prevents Mpro like polarization [66].
      Conversely, Manti macrophages in vitro similarly as present in the lean WAT have not been reported, but Manti can be differentiated in BMDM cultures by several means. Supplementation of culture media with IL-4 or IL-13 creates different CD206 expressing Manti macrophages, than those that require TLR and IL1R agonists [61, 100]. Another Manti population can be differentiated by IL-10 which shares anti-inflammatory properties with the other two BMDM subtypes [72]. Strikingly, reactivity to IL-6 is required to polarize towards all of these Manti type macrophages. In particular, arginase 1 and IL-4Rα expression critically depend on IL-6 signaling [67]. Taken together, reallocation from Mpro like towards Manti type ATMs might be a promising strategy to resume whole body insulin sensitivity that would prevent fatal diseases associated with obesity such as development of metabolic syndrome and the progression to cancer. In line with this evidence, nematode infection or vaccination with nematode antigens reprograms the obese WAT microenvironment towards anti-inflammatory conditions resulting in improved insulin sensitivity and glucose tolerance [4].
    
    
      Kupffer cells and liver infiltrating macrophages
      The liver is essential for life due to its metabolic as well as immunoregulatory functions. On the one hand, under high energy conditions and hyperglycemia, hepatocytes in the liver import excessive glucose that is converted to glycogen. During fasting periods, the liver maintains blood glucose levels via hepatic glucose production that includes degradation of glycogen by glycogenolysis and breakdown of proteins and lipids through gluconeogenesis upon prolonged fasting. On the other, the liver is the first line defense against pathogens via the acute phase response and clears infected as well as exhausted cells. In line with its immune function, the blood stream entering the liver through the portal vein runs through the gut as well as the WAT before. In liver sinusoids, specialized liver resident macrophages, the KC, sense and combat invading commensals from the gut to prevent spreading along circulation [88]. Gut-derived LPS for example can be detected in portal vein but less in circulation [45]. In obesity, impaired storage of excessive lipids in the WAT leads to liver fat accumulation resulting in steatosis and fatty liver diseases [107]. The inappropriate fat storage in the liver results in lipotoxicity which in turn leads to liver damage and inflammation [74, 118]. Thus, in obesity, lipotoxicity and elevated microbial load from the microbiota result in excessive inflammation mediated by KCs and infiltrating macrophages. Interestingly, depletion of phagocytic cells in the liver via clodronate liposomes prevents steatosis, inflammation, and the development of insulin resistance thereby identifying hepatic macrophages as mediators of obesity-associated pathologies [58]. Hepatic macrophages crosstalk to liver non-parenchymal cells and adapt their polarization to states of liver condition. Obesity-induced pro-inflammatory cytokines and LPS polarize KC towards Mpro that in turn induce a vicious cycle of TNFα, IL-6, and IL-1β that further boosts and deteriorates liver functions [46, 53]. The inflammatory boost in obesity does not alter KC numbers but dramatically increases infiltration of CCR2-positive monocytes [52, 71]. Furthermore, inflammatory TNFα released by hepatic macrophages limits systemic insulin action, and IL-6 signaling in hepatocytes instructs downregulation of the inflammatory response in hepatic macrophages [120]. Collectively, inflammatory signaling in the liver differentially affects hepatic cell types and might result in complicating outcomes in whole body metabolism.
    
    
      Obesity-induced low-grade inflammation and insulin resistance
      Obesity contributes to the development of insulin resistance through the so-called obesity-associated low-grade inflammation or metaflammation. Over the course of this process, immune cells infiltrate metabolic organs, mainly WAT and liver, where they secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines that act locally but also systemically after being released into circulation [82].
      The cytokine levels in obesity do not reach levels upon infection, but instead are elevated 2–3-fold compared to homeostatic conditions. Moreover, while during infection, pro-inflammatory cytokines increase acutely and stagnate with the elimination of the pathogen, the obesity-associated low-grade inflammation exhibits chronic character suggesting that dynamic modes of action have to be taken into account. The best-studied inflammatory players in obesity are TNFα and IL-6, but also include IL-17, CCL-2, and many others. In this paragraph, we will delineate how TNFα- and IL-6-induced signaling impact on the insulin signaling cascade.
    
    
      TNFα
      In a ground breaking report, Hotamisligil and colleagues discovered that the obese WAT contains high levels of the pro-inflammatory cytokine TNFα [39]. In a follow-up study, they could show in tissue culture experiments that media supplemented with TNFα impaired insulin action [40]. On a molecular level, TNFα compromises activating tyrosine phosphorylations in the insulin signaling cascade mainly of IRS molecules, but also the IR. While at that time, adipocytes were believed to be the source of TNFα in obesity, Xu et al. demonstrated that the stromal vascular fraction of WAT secretes pro-inflammatory cytokines that inhibit insulin signaling [122]. Moreover, bone marrow transplantation experiments revealed that mainly macrophages are the source of TNFα in the obese WAT [14]. TNFα interferes with insulin recpetor signaling at the level of IRS molecules. IRS molecules are phosphorylated on inhibitory serine residues by TNFα-induced kinases such as IκB kinase (IKK), c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and atypical protein kinase C (aPKC) thereby preventing further downstream signaling [77]. Of note, these kinases have redundant as well as individual functions in IRS phosphorylation and point mutations of IRS1 serine residues to non-phosporylatable counterparts yielded the conflicting result that mutant mice developed insulin resistance [9]. Nevertheless, genetic mouse models provided novel insight into how TNFα-induced signaling interferes with insulin signaling in obesity. On the one hand, TNFα knockout mice exhibit normal glucose tolerance when exposed to normal food, but are protected from the development of obesity-induced insulin resistance in the absence of body weight gain alterations on the other [106]. While this study demonstrated the critical importance of TNFα in the development of insulin resistance, the dissection of further downstream signaling at the TNFα-induced kinase level has revealed surprising results. TNFα induces a dual kinase system that comprises the IKK complex and the JNK kinases [101]. The IKK complex contains the kinases IKK-1 and IKK-2 as well as the NFκB essential modulator NEMO, all of which are essential for mouse viability as revealed by knockout studies. Muscle-specific IKK-2 inactivation showed no effect on diet-induced obesity and alterations in glucose homeostasis [89]. However, while hepatic IKK-2 inactivation conferred insulin sensitivity in this organ, but not in muscle and WAT, myeloid IKK-2 inactivation resulted in systemic improvements of insulin sensitivity upon high-fat diet (HFD) challenge mainly due to reduced inflammatory cytokine release [1, 6]. Otherwise, hepatic NEMO inactivation resulted in global improvements in insulin sensitivity under obese conditions, but in contrast to IKK-2 KO mice, these mice developed liver tumors due to ongoing TNFα-induced cell death and compensatory hyperproliferation [119]. Thus, though activated by the same upstream stimulus, kinases may play redundant and non-redundant roles in impairing the actions of insulin.
      In contrast to the IKK complex genes, knockout of one of the three individual JNK kinases (JNK-1, JNK-2, and JNK-3) is well tolerated in mice, whereas double knockout for the most abundant peripheral JNK-1 and JNK-2 is embryonic lethal [57]. It has been shown that JNK-1 but not JNK-2 knockout mice are protected against obesity-induced impairments of glucose homeostasis suggesting an essential role for JNK-1 in serine phosphorylation of IRS molecules [35]. However, conditional mouse models aimed at unraveling the cell type-specific as well as redundant functions of the JNK genes in the development of obesity-associated insulin resistance. Opposite to what was expected, hepatic inactivation of JNK-1 revealed a modestly impaired glucose tolerance and hepatic lipid accumulation suggesting a function of JNK-1 in the prevention of steatosis and liver fat accumulation [110]. Moreover, skeletal muscle-specific JNK-1 deficiency revealed a minor role in glucose metabolism [84], whereas WAT-specific JNK-1 deletion decreased obesity-induced IL-6 levels and thus ameliorated diet-induced insulin resistance [92]. However, neuronal-specific JNK-1 deficiency most closely resembled the phenotype of complete JNK-1 knockout mice indicating that a redundancy between JNK isoforms in peripheral organs exist [3]. In line with these findings, JNK-1/JNK-2 double-deficient macrophages are unable to produce inflammatory cytokines, and thus, mice with macrophage-specific deletion of JNK-1 and 2 are protected against obesity-induced disorders [30, 31]. Collectively, deciphering organ-specific downstream actions of TNFα in obesity-induced insulin resistance revealed redundant as well as non-redundant kinase functions on inhibitory IRS serine phosphorylation.
    
    
      IL-6
      IL-6 is a pleiotropic cytokine that plays crucial roles in metabolic and immune cells. Similar to TNFα, IL-6 is also slightly increased in serum of obese individuals and mice, which is believed to be detrimental for metabolism [2]. Here, a bulk of IL-6 is produced by the stromal vascular fraction of visceral fat depots, which is directly delivered to the liver via the portal vein [92]. In contrast, IL-6 is increased manifold during intense exercise in muscle (regulated by JNK-1) that provides beneficial effects on metabolism [116]. IL-6 exerts its function by binding to the IL-6 receptor α chain (IL-6Rα) and the GP130 signaling chain complex in classical membrane-bound pathway. The IL-6Rα is expressed mainly on hepatocytes and immune cells, but also non-IL-6Rα-expressing cells can be rendered IL-6-responsive by a mechanism called trans-signaling [33, 94]. IL-6 trans-signaling is the process where adam proteases cleave/shed the IL-6Rα from the surface of IL-6Rα-expressing cells that when bound to serum IL-6 generates the soluble IL-6Rα (sIL-6Rα). sIL-6Rα in turn binds ubiquitously expressed GP130 on cells not expressing IL-6Rα to activate the same signaling cascade as the classical membrane IL-6Rα signaling [94]. Both cascades initiate Janus kinase (JAK)2/STAT-3-dependent transcriptional activation of target genes such as SOCS-3 [33]. SOCS-3 is not only a negative regulator of IL-6 signaling but also inhibits insulin signal transduction at the IRS protein level. Here, IL-6-induced SOCS-3 leads to ubiquitination and subsequent proteasomal degradation of IRS1 [104, 105]. Consistently, clinical studies link obesity-induced insulin resistance with increased IL-6 levels. Importantly, weight loss reduces circulating IL-6 and improves insulin sensitivity [2]. On the other hand, however, IL-6 itself provides beneficial effects on metabolic processes such as regulation of hepatic gluconeogenesis indicating that the molecular mechanism of how IL-6 affects metabolism and insulin sensitivity is not completely understood [43, 87]. When IL-6 would exert negative effects on glucose metabolism exclusively, the expectation for IL-6 knockout mice would be the maintenance of insulin sensitivity. However, while Di Gregorio et al. did not observe metabolic alterations in IL-6 knockout mice [16], Wallenius and colleagues demonstrated that IL-6 inactivation favors the development of mature onset obesity and diabetes implicating that IL-6 action on metabolism might be even more complex than hitherto assumed [111].
      A potential aspect that may explain these differences might be the chronic/constant presence of IL-6 under obesity conditions. We have demonstrated that in diet-induced obesity, the chronically high IL-6 levels lead to the development of hepatic IL-6 resistance [29]. IL-6 resistance is caused by basal IL-6-activated STAT3 that chronically increases expression of SOCS-3 [121]. SOCS-3 in turn inhibits IL-6 receptor signaling, which can be identified by the inability of liver cells to react with STAT3 phosphorylation upon exogenous IL-6 treatment. Such high hepatic SOCS-3 levels might not only have impact on IL-6 signaling, but also on the insulin receptor signaling cascade by interfering with IRS proteins. Consistently, inactivation of SOCS-3 in hepatocytes improves hepatic insulin action and steatosis in young mice, but at older age, these mice develop obesity and insulin resistance due to the activation of acute phase response and overt inflammation [103]. IL-6 signaling in hepatocytes therefore somehow crosstalks with liver resident KCs that are the source for the inflammatory response. In line with this evidence, inactivation of the IL-6 receptor in hepatocytes fulminates in the development of systemic insulin resistance as a consequence of KC-mediated inflammation. Thus, IL-6 signaling in hepatocytes controls whole body insulin sensitivity by limiting KC-mediated inflammation [120]. Therefore, considering the differential aspects of IL-6 action under lean and obese conditions will contribute to our molecular knowledge how the low-grade metaflammation impacts on insulin signaling to ultimately result in the development of metabolic disorders. Given that IL-6 not only impacts on metabolism but also on the development of cancer and that obesity increases the incidence of cancer entities with an inflammatory microenvironment, the context-specific dissection of signaling cascades will be necessary for the development of novel therapeutic interventions to combat such fatal obesity-associated diseases [68].
    
    
      Conclusion/outlook
      Inflammation triggered by macrophages constitutes a turning point in the development of obesity-related insulin resistance. It is not only that mediators secreted by macrophages trigger insulin resistance, at the same time, also beneficial effects exerted by ATM and KCs under homeostasis are compromised. These include maintenance of a local anti-inflammatory milieu, insulin sensitivity, and control of lipolysis and energy expenditure. Research over the last 15 years has uncovered mechanisms that drive changes in macrophage polarization and how molecules secreted by macrophages affect lipid metabolism and insulin receptor signaling in metabolic organs. The use of mouse models pointed out that macrophage polarization in adipose tissue and the liver is critical for development and progression of metabolic disease. Reprogramming from inflammatory Mpro towards alternative Manti macrophages might represent a promising strategy to recover whole body insulin sensitivity that would prevent fatal diseases associated with obesity. Indeed, thiazolidinediones and omega 3 fatty acids are such exemplary drugs or dietary factors that improve metabolic disease partly by dampening macrophage-mediated inflammation [34, 80]. In this context, targeting immune cell metabolism might also hold great potential. Systemic insulin resistance is also observed during pregnancy or puberty, but most notably also during infection, in particular sepsis. During sepsis, inflammatory cytokines in particular IL-6 and TNFα induce a state of insulin resistance [69]. Moreover, while in type 2 diabetes, lipolysis in adipose tissue and gluconeogenesis in the liver slowly emerge as a result of insulin resistance, inflammatory cytokines actively induce lipolysis in adipose tissue, protein catabolism in the muscle, and gluconeogenesis in the liver and muscle during sepsis. Central mediators include glucagon, epinephrine, and cortisol, which are released as a consequence of the inflammatory cascade [32]. From an evolutionary point of view, this metabolic response serves to support the immune system in fighting the infection and limiting its spread throughout the body in the context of sepsis. As outlined above Mpro macrophages and also other immune cells rely on glycolysis to fuel their inflammatory response to fight infection [83]. In the context of type 2 diabetes and obesity, increased glucose availability to immune cells might initiate a feed forward loop that fosters inflammation and further aggravates disease.
    
  

    
      
        This article is part of the special issue on macrophages in tissue homeostasis in Pflügers Archiv – European Journal of Physiology
      
    
    
      Acknowledgements
      Open access funding provided by Max Planck Society. This work was supported by funds of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (SFB1123, MARL, SFB670, FTW, TR134, FTW, KFO286, FTW, CECAD, FTW) and the Deutsche Krebshilfe (FTW).
    
    
      References
      
        1.
        
          
            
              Arkan
              MC
            
            
              Hevener
              AL
            
            
              Greten
              FR
            
            
              Maeda
              S
            
            
              Li
              ZW
            
            
              Long
              JM
            
            
              Wynshaw-Boris
              A
            
            
              Poli
              G
            
            
              Olefsky
              J
            
            
              Karin
              M
            
          
          IKK-beta links inflammation to obesity-induced insulin resistance
          Nat Med
          2005
          11
          191
          198
          10.1038/nm1185
          
          15685170
        
      
      
        2.
        
          
            
              Bastard
              JP
            
            
              Jardel
              C
            
            
              Bruckert
              E
            
            
              Blondy
              P
            
            
              Capeau
              J
            
            
              Laville
              M
            
            
              Vidal
              H
            
            
              Hainque
              B
            
          
          Elevated levels of interleukin 6 are reduced in serum and subcutaneous adipose tissue of obese women after weight loss
          J Clin Endocrinol Metab
          2000
          85
          3338
          3342
          
          10999830
        
      
      
        3.
        
          
            
              Belgardt
              BF
            
            
              Mauer
              J
            
            
              Wunderlich
              FT
            
            
              Ernst
              MB
            
            
              Pal
              M
            
            
              Spohn
              G
            
            
              Bronneke
              HS
            
            
              Brodesser
              S
            
            
              Hampel
              B
            
            
              Schauss
              AC
            
            
              Bruning
              JC
            
          
          Hypothalamic and pituitary c-Jun N-terminal kinase 1 signaling coordinately regulates glucose metabolism
          Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
          2010
          107
          6028
          6033
          10.1073/pnas.1001796107
          
          20231445
        
      
      
        4.
        
          
            
              Berbudi
              A
            
            
              Surendar
              J
            
            
              Ajendra
              J
            
            
              Gondorf
              F
            
            
              Schmidt
              D
            
            
              Neumann
              AL
            
            
              Wardani
              AP
            
            
              Layland
              LE
            
            
              Hoffmann
              LS
            
            
              Pfeifer
              A
            
            
              Hoerauf
              A
            
            
              Hubner
              MP
            
          
          Filarial infection or antigen administration improves glucose tolerance in diet-induced obese mice
          J Innate Immun
          2016
          8
          601
          616
          10.1159/000448401
          
          27544668
        
      
      
        5.
        Boucher J, Kleinridders A, Kahn CR (2014) Insulin receptor signaling in normal and insulin-resistant states. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 6. doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a009191
      
      
        6.
        
          
            
              Cai
              D
            
            
              Yuan
              M
            
            
              Frantz
              DF
            
            
              Melendez
              PA
            
            
              Hansen
              L
            
            
              Lee
              J
            
            
              Shoelson
              SE
            
          
          Local and systemic insulin resistance resulting from hepatic activation of IKK-beta and NF-kappaB
          Nat Med
          2005
          11
          183
          190
          10.1038/nm1166
          
          15685173
        
      
      
        7.
        
          
            
              Calle
              EE
            
            
              Kaaks
              R
            
          
          Overweight, obesity and cancer: epidemiological evidence and proposed mechanisms
          Nat Rev Cancer
          2004
          4
          579
          591
          10.1038/nrc1408
          
          15286738
        
      
      
        8.
        
          
            
              Caricilli
              AM
            
            
              Picardi
              PK
            
            
              de Abreu
              LL
            
            
              Ueno
              M
            
            
              Prada
              PO
            
            
              Ropelle
              ER
            
            
              Hirabara
              SM
            
            
              Castoldi
              A
            
            
              Vieira
              P
            
            
              Camara
              NO
            
            
              Curi
              R
            
            
              Carvalheira
              JB
            
            
              Saad
              MJ
            
          
          Gut microbiota is a key modulator of insulin resistance in TLR 2 knockout mice
          PLoS Biol
          2011
          9
          e1001212
          10.1371/journal.pbio.1001212
          
          22162948
        
      
      
        9.
        
          
            
              Copps
              KD
            
            
              Hancer
              NJ
            
            
              Opare-Ado
              L
            
            
              Qiu
              W
            
            
              Walsh
              C
            
            
              White
              MF
            
          
          Irs1 serine 307 promotes insulin sensitivity in mice
          Cell Metab
          2010
          11
          84
          92
          10.1016/j.cmet.2009.11.003
          
          20074531
        
      
      
        10.
        
          
            
              Corre
              J
            
            
              Barreau
              C
            
            
              Cousin
              B
            
            
              Chavoin
              JP
            
            
              Caton
              D
            
            
              Fournial
              G
            
            
              Penicaud
              L
            
            
              Casteilla
              L
            
            
              Laharrague
              P
            
          
          Human subcutaneous adipose cells support complete differentiation but not self-renewal of hematopoietic progenitors
          J Cell Physiol
          2006
          208
          282
          288
          10.1002/jcp.20655
          
          16619234
        
      
      
        11.
        Covarrubias AJ, Aksoylar HI, Yu J, Snyder NW, Worth AJ, Iyer SS, Wang J, Ben-Sahra I, Byles V, Polynne-Stapornkul T, Espinosa EC, Lamming D, Manning BD, Zhang Y, Blair IA, Horng T (2016) Akt-mTORC1 signaling regulates Acly to integrate metabolic input to control of macrophage activation. elife 5. doi:10.7554/eLife.11612
      
      
        12.
        
          
            
              Cramer
              T
            
            
              Yamanishi
              Y
            
            
              Clausen
              BE
            
            
              Forster
              I
            
            
              Pawlinski
              R
            
            
              Mackman
              N
            
            
              Haase
              VH
            
            
              Jaenisch
              R
            
            
              Corr
              M
            
            
              Nizet
              V
            
            
              Firestein
              GS
            
            
              Gerber
              HP
            
            
              Ferrara
              N
            
            
              Johnson
              RS
            
          
          HIF-1alpha is essential for myeloid cell-mediated inflammation
          Cell
          2003
          112
          645
          657
          10.1016/S0092-8674(03)00154-5
          
          12628185
        
      
      
        13.
        
          
            
              Davis
              JE
            
            
              Gabler
              NK
            
            
              Walker-Daniels
              J
            
            
              Spurlock
              ME
            
          
          Tlr-4 deficiency selectively protects against obesity induced by diets high in saturated fat
          Obesity (Silver Spring)
          2008
          16
          1248
          1255
          10.1038/oby.2008.210
          18421279
        
      
      
        14.
        
          
            
              De Taeye
              BM
            
            
              Novitskaya
              T
            
            
              McGuinness
              OP
            
            
              Gleaves
              L
            
            
              Medda
              M
            
            
              Covington
              JW
            
            
              Vaughan
              DE
            
          
          Macrophage TNF-alpha contributes to insulin resistance and hepatic steatosis in diet-induced obesity
          Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab
          2007
          293
          E713
          E725
          10.1152/ajpendo.00194.2007
          
          17578885
        
      
      
        15.
        
          
            
              DeBerardinis
              RJ
            
            
              Chandel
              NS
            
          
          Fundamentals of cancer metabolism
          Sci Adv
          2016
          2
          e1600200
          10.1126/sciadv.1600200
          
          27386546
        
      
      
        16.
        
          
            
              Di Gregorio
              GB
            
            
              Hensley
              L
            
            
              Lu
              T
            
            
              Ranganathan
              G
            
            
              Kern
              PA
            
          
          Lipid and carbohydrate metabolism in mice with a targeted mutation in the IL-6 gene: absence of development of age-related obesity
          Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab
          2004
          287
          E182
          E187
          10.1152/ajpendo.00189.2003
          
          15191885
        
      
      
        17.
        
          
            
              Dinarello
              CA
            
          
          Historical insights into cytokines
          Eur J Immunol
          2007
          37
          Suppl 1
          S34
          S45
          10.1002/eji.200737772
          
          17972343
        
      
      
        18.
        
          
            
              Feuerer
              M
            
            
              Herrero
              L
            
            
              Cipolletta
              D
            
            
              Naaz
              A
            
            
              Wong
              J
            
            
              Nayer
              A
            
            
              Lee
              J
            
            
              Goldfine
              AB
            
            
              Benoist
              C
            
            
              Shoelson
              S
            
            
              Mathis
              D
            
          
          Lean, but not obese, fat is enriched for a unique population of regulatory T cells that affect metabolic parameters
          Nat Med
          2009
          15
          930
          939
          10.1038/nm.2002
          
          19633656
        
      
      
        19.
        
          
            
              Freemerman
              AJ
            
            
              Johnson
              AR
            
            
              Sacks
              GN
            
            
              Milner
              JJ
            
            
              Kirk
              EL
            
            
              Troester
              MA
            
            
              Macintyre
              AN
            
            
              Goraksha-Hicks
              P
            
            
              Rathmell
              JC
            
            
              Makowski
              L
            
          
          Metabolic reprogramming of macrophages: glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1)-mediated glucose metabolism drives a proinflammatory phenotype
          J Biol Chem
          2014
          289
          7884
          7896
          10.1074/jbc.M113.522037
          
          24492615
        
      
      
        20.
        
          
            
              Galvan-Pena
              S
            
            
              O’Neill
              LA
            
          
          Metabolic reprograming in macrophage polarization
          Front Immunol
          2014
          5
          420
          
          25228902
        
      
      
        21.
        
          
            
              Geissmann
              F
            
            
              Jung
              S
            
            
              Littman
              DR
            
          
          Blood monocytes consist of two principal subsets with distinct migratory properties
          Immunity
          2003
          19
          71
          82
          10.1016/S1074-7613(03)00174-2
          
          12871640
        
      
      
        22.
        
          
            
              Ginhoux
              F
            
            
              Guilliams
              M
            
          
          Tissue-resident macrophage ontogeny and homeostasis
          Immunity
          2016
          44
          439
          449
          10.1016/j.immuni.2016.02.024
          
          26982352
        
      
      
        23.
        
          
            
              Ginhoux
              F
            
            
              Greter
              M
            
            
              Leboeuf
              M
            
            
              Nandi
              S
            
            
              See
              P
            
            
              Gokhan
              S
            
            
              Mehler
              MF
            
            
              Conway
              SJ
            
            
              Ng
              LG
            
            
              Stanley
              ER
            
            
              Samokhvalov
              IM
            
            
              Merad
              M
            
          
          Fate mapping analysis reveals that adult microglia derive from primitive macrophages
          Science
          2010
          330
          841
          845
          10.1126/science.1194637
          
          20966214
        
      
      
        24.
        
          
            
              Ginhoux
              F
            
            
              Schultze
              JL
            
            
              Murray
              PJ
            
            
              Ochando
              J
            
            
              Biswas
              SK
            
          
          New insights into the multidimensional concept of macrophage ontogeny, activation and function
          Nat Immunol
          2016
          17
          34
          40
          10.1038/ni.3324
          
          26681460
        
      
      
        25.
        
          
            
              Gomez Perdiguero
              E
            
            
              Klapproth
              K
            
            
              Schulz
              C
            
            
              Busch
              K
            
            
              Azzoni
              E
            
            
              Crozet
              L
            
            
              Garner
              H
            
            
              Trouillet
              C
            
            
              de Bruijn
              MF
            
            
              Geissmann
              F
            
            
              Rodewald
              HR
            
          
          Tissue-resident macrophages originate from yolk-sac-derived erythro-myeloid progenitors
          Nature
          2015
          518
          547
          551
          10.1038/nature13989
          
          25470051
        
      
      
        26.
        
          
            
              Gordon
              S
            
          
          Alternative activation of macrophages
          Nat Rev Immunol
          2003
          3
          23
          35
          10.1038/nri978
          
          12511873
        
      
      
        27.
        
          
            
              Gosselin
              D
            
            
              Link
              VM
            
            
              Romanoski
              CE
            
            
              Fonseca
              GJ
            
            
              Eichenfield
              DZ
            
            
              Spann
              NJ
            
            
              Stender
              JD
            
            
              Chun
              HB
            
            
              Garner
              H
            
            
              Geissmann
              F
            
            
              Glass
              CK
            
          
          Environment drives selection and function of enhancers controlling tissue-specific macrophage identities
          Cell
          2014
          159
          1327
          1340
          10.1016/j.cell.2014.11.023
          
          25480297
        
      
      
        28.
        
          
            
              Gregor
              MF
            
            
              Hotamisligil
              GS
            
          
          Inflammatory mechanisms in obesity
          Annu Rev Immunol
          2011
          29
          415
          445
          10.1146/annurev-immunol-031210-101322
          
          21219177
        
      
      
        29.
        
          
            
              Gruber
              S
            
            
              Straub
              BK
            
            
              Ackermann
              PJ
            
            
              Wunderlich
              CM
            
            
              Mauer
              J
            
            
              Seeger
              JM
            
            
              Buning
              H
            
            
              Heukamp
              L
            
            
              Kashkar
              H
            
            
              Schirmacher
              P
            
            
              Bruning
              JC
            
            
              Wunderlich
              FT
            
          
          Obesity promotes liver carcinogenesis via mcl-1 stabilization independent of IL-6Ralpha signaling
          Cell Rep
          2013
          4
          669
          680
          10.1016/j.celrep.2013.07.023
          
          23954788
        
      
      
        30.
        
          
            
              Han
              MS
            
            
              Jung
              DY
            
            
              Morel
              C
            
            
              Lakhani
              SA
            
            
              Kim
              JK
            
            
              Flavell
              RA
            
            
              Davis
              RJ
            
          
          JNK expression by macrophages promotes obesity-induced insulin resistance and inflammation
          Science
          2013
          339
          218
          222
          10.1126/science.1227568
          
          23223452
        
      
      
        31.
        
          
            
              Han
              MS
            
            
              Barrett
              T
            
            
              Brehm
              MA
            
            
              Davis
              RJ
            
          
          Inflammation mediated by JNK in myeloid cells promotes the development of hepatitis and hepatocellular carcinoma
          Cell Rep
          2016
          15
          19
          26
          10.1016/j.celrep.2016.03.008
          
          27052181
        
      
      
        32.
        
          
            
              Hartl
              WH
            
            
              Jauch
              KW
            
          
          Metabolic self-destruction in critically ill patients: origins, mechanisms and therapeutic principles
          Nutrition
          2014
          30
          261
          267
          10.1016/j.nut.2013.07.019
          
          24369911
        
      
      
        33.
        
          
            
              Heinrich
              PC
            
            
              Behrmann
              I
            
            
              Muller-Newen
              G
            
            
              Schaper
              F
            
            
              Graeve
              L
            
          
          Interleukin-6-type cytokine signalling through the gp130/Jak/STAT pathway
          Biochem J
          1998
          334
          Pt 2
          297
          314
          10.1042/bj3340297
          
          9716487
        
      
      
        34.
        
          
            
              Hevener
              AL
            
            
              Olefsky
              JM
            
            
              Reichart
              D
            
            
              Nguyen
              MT
            
            
              Bandyopadyhay
              G
            
            
              Leung
              HY
            
            
              Watt
              MJ
            
            
              Benner
              C
            
            
              Febbraio
              MA
            
            
              Nguyen
              AK
            
            
              Folian
              B
            
            
              Subramaniam
              S
            
            
              Gonzalez
              FJ
            
            
              Glass
              CK
            
            
              Ricote
              M
            
          
          Macrophage PPAR gamma is required for normal skeletal muscle and hepatic insulin sensitivity and full antidiabetic effects of thiazolidinediones
          J Clin Invest
          2007
          117
          1658
          1669
          10.1172/JCI31561
          
          17525798
        
      
      
        35.
        
          
            
              Hirosumi
              J
            
            
              Tuncman
              G
            
            
              Chang
              L
            
            
              Gorgun
              CZ
            
            
              Uysal
              KT
            
            
              Maeda
              K
            
            
              Karin
              M
            
            
              Hotamisligil
              GS
            
          
          A central role for JNK in obesity and insulin resistance
          Nature
          2002
          420
          333
          336
          10.1038/nature01137
          
          12447443
        
      
      
        36.
        
          
            
              Hoeffel
              G
            
            
              Chen
              J
            
            
              Lavin
              Y
            
            
              Low
              D
            
            
              Almeida
              FF
            
            
              See
              P
            
            
              Beaudin
              AE
            
            
              Lum
              J
            
            
              Low
              I
            
            
              Forsberg
              EC
            
            
              Poidinger
              M
            
            
              Zolezzi
              F
            
            
              Larbi
              A
            
            
              Ng
              LG
            
            
              Chan
              JK
            
            
              Greter
              M
            
            
              Becher
              B
            
            
              Samokhvalov
              IM
            
            
              Merad
              M
            
            
              Ginhoux
              F
            
          
          C-Myb(+) erythro-myeloid progenitor-derived fetal monocytes give rise to adult tissue-resident macrophages
          Immunity
          2015
          42
          665
          678
          10.1016/j.immuni.2015.03.011
          
          25902481
        
      
      
        37.
        
          
            
              Hotamisligil
              GS
            
          
          Inflammatory pathways and insulin action
          Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord
          2003
          27
          Suppl 3
          S53
          S55
          10.1038/sj.ijo.0802502
          
          14704746
        
      
      
        38.
        
          
            
              Hotamisligil
              GS
            
          
          Inflammation and metabolic disorders
          Nature
          2006
          444
          860
          867
          10.1038/nature05485
          
          17167474
        
      
      
        39.
        
          
            
              Hotamisligil
              GS
            
            
              Shargill
              NS
            
            
              Spiegelman
              BM
            
          
          Adipose expression of tumor necrosis factor-alpha: direct role in obesity-linked insulin resistance
          Science
          1993
          259
          87
          91
          10.1126/science.7678183
          
          7678183
        
      
      
        40.
        
          
            
              Hotamisligil
              GS
            
            
              Murray
              DL
            
            
              Choy
              LN
            
            
              Spiegelman
              BM
            
          
          Tumor necrosis factor alpha inhibits signaling from the insulin receptor
          Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
          1994
          91
          4854
          4858
          10.1073/pnas.91.11.4854
          
          8197147
        
      
      
        41.
        
          
            
              Huang
              SC
            
            
              Everts
              B
            
            
              Ivanova
              Y
            
            
              O’Sullivan
              D
            
            
              Nascimento
              M
            
            
              Smith
              AM
            
            
              Beatty
              W
            
            
              Love-Gregory
              L
            
            
              Lam
              WY
            
            
              O’Neill
              CM
            
            
              Yan
              C
            
            
              Du
              H
            
            
              Abumrad
              NA
            
            
              Urban
              JF
              Jr
            
            
              Artyomov
              MN
            
            
              Pearce
              EL
            
            
              Pearce
              EJ
            
          
          Cell-intrinsic lysosomal lipolysis is essential for alternative activation of macrophages
          Nat Immunol
          2014
          15
          846
          855
          10.1038/ni.2956
          
          25086775
        
      
      
        42.
        
          
            
              Infantino
              V
            
            
              Convertini
              P
            
            
              Cucci
              L
            
            
              Panaro
              MA
            
            
              Di Noia
              MA
            
            
              Calvello
              R
            
            
              Palmieri
              F
            
            
              Iacobazzi
              V
            
          
          The mitochondrial citrate carrier: a new player in inflammation
          Biochem J
          2011
          438
          433
          436
          10.1042/BJ20111275
          
          21787310
        
      
      
        43.
        
          
            
              Inoue
              H
            
            
              Ogawa
              W
            
            
              Asakawa
              A
            
            
              Okamoto
              Y
            
            
              Nishizawa
              A
            
            
              Matsumoto
              M
            
            
              Teshigawara
              K
            
            
              Matsuki
              Y
            
            
              Watanabe
              E
            
            
              Hiramatsu
              R
            
            
              Notohara
              K
            
            
              Katayose
              K
            
            
              Okamura
              H
            
            
              Kahn
              CR
            
            
              Noda
              T
            
            
              Takeda
              K
            
            
              Akira
              S
            
            
              Inui
              A
            
            
              Kasuga
              M
            
          
          Role of hepatic STAT3 in brain-insulin action on hepatic glucose production
          Cell Metab
          2006
          3
          267
          275
          10.1016/j.cmet.2006.02.009
          
          16581004
        
      
      
        44.
        
          
            
              Iwasaki
              A
            
            
              Medzhitov
              R
            
          
          Control of adaptive immunity by the innate immune system
          Nat Immunol
          2015
          16
          343
          353
          10.1038/ni.3123
          
          25789684
        
      
      
        45.
        
          
            
              Jacob
              AI
            
            
              Goldberg
              PK
            
            
              Bloom
              N
            
            
              Degenshein
              GA
            
            
              Kozinn
              PJ
            
          
          Endotoxin and bacteria in portal blood
          Gastroenterology
          1977
          72
          1268
          1270
          
          858472
        
      
      
        46.
        
          
            
              Jager
              J
            
            
              Aparicio-Vergara
              M
            
            
              Aouadi
              M
            
          
          Liver innate immune cells and insulin resistance: the multiple facets of Kupffer cells
          J Intern Med
          2016
          280
          209
          220
          10.1111/joim.12483
          
          26864622
        
      
      
        47.
        
          
            
              Jha
              AK
            
            
              Huang
              SC
            
            
              Sergushichev
              A
            
            
              Lampropoulou
              V
            
            
              Ivanova
              Y
            
            
              Loginicheva
              E
            
            
              Chmielewski
              K
            
            
              Stewart
              KM
            
            
              Ashall
              J
            
            
              Everts
              B
            
            
              Pearce
              EJ
            
            
              Driggers
              EM
            
            
              Artyomov
              MN
            
          
          Network integration of parallel metabolic and transcriptional data reveals metabolic modules that regulate macrophage polarization
          Immunity
          2015
          42
          419
          430
          10.1016/j.immuni.2015.02.005
          
          25786174
        
      
      
        48.
        
          
            
              Kadowaki
              T
            
            
              Tobe
              K
            
            
              Honda-Yamamoto
              R
            
            
              Tamemoto
              H
            
            
              Kaburagi
              Y
            
            
              Momomura
              K
            
            
              Ueki
              K
            
            
              Takahashi
              Y
            
            
              Yamauchi
              T
            
            
              Akanuma
              Y
            
            
              Yazaki
              Y
            
          
          Signal transduction mechanism of insulin and insulin-like growth factor-1
          Endocr J
          1996
          43
          Suppl
          S33
          S41
          10.1507/endocrj.43.Suppl_S33
          
          9076340
        
      
      
        49.
        
          
            
              Kang
              K
            
            
              Reilly
              SM
            
            
              Karabacak
              V
            
            
              Gangl
              MR
            
            
              Fitzgerald
              K
            
            
              Hatano
              B
            
            
              Lee
              CH
            
          
          Adipocyte-derived Th2 cytokines and myeloid PPARdelta regulate macrophage polarization and insulin sensitivity
          Cell Metab
          2008
          7
          485
          495
          10.1016/j.cmet.2008.04.002
          
          18522830
        
      
      
        50.
        
          
            
              Kim
              F
            
            
              Pham
              M
            
            
              Luttrell
              I
            
            
              Bannerman
              DD
            
            
              Tupper
              J
            
            
              Thaler
              J
            
            
              Hawn
              TR
            
            
              Raines
              EW
            
            
              Schwartz
              MW
            
          
          Toll-like receptor-4 mediates vascular inflammation and insulin resistance in diet-induced obesity
          Circ Res
          2007
          100
          1589
          1596
          10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.106.142851
          
          17478729
        
      
      
        51.
        
          
            
              Kitade
              H
            
            
              Sawamoto
              K
            
            
              Nagashimada
              M
            
            
              Inoue
              H
            
            
              Yamamoto
              Y
            
            
              Sai
              Y
            
            
              Takamura
              T
            
            
              Yamamoto
              H
            
            
              Miyamoto
              K
            
            
              Ginsberg
              HN
            
            
              Mukaida
              N
            
            
              Kaneko
              S
            
            
              Ota
              T
            
          
          CCR5 plays a critical role in obesity-induced adipose tissue inflammation and insulin resistance by regulating both macrophage recruitment and M1/M2 status
          Diabetes
          2012
          61
          1680
          1690
          10.2337/db11-1506
          
          22474027
        
      
      
        52.
        
          
            
              Klueh
              U
            
            
              Czajkowski
              C
            
            
              Ludzinska
              I
            
            
              Qiao
              Y
            
            
              Frailey
              J
            
            
              Kreutzer
              DL
            
          
          Impact of CCL2 and CCR2 chemokine/receptor deficiencies on macrophage recruitment and continuous glucose monitoring in vivo
          Biosens Bioelectron
          2016
          86
          262
          269
          10.1016/j.bios.2016.06.026
          
          27376197
        
      
      
        53.
        
          
            
              Kolios
              G
            
            
              Valatas
              V
            
            
              Kouroumalis
              E
            
          
          Role of Kupffer cells in the pathogenesis of liver disease
          World J Gastroenterol
          2006
          12
          7413
          7420
          10.3748/wjg.v12.i46.7413
          
          17167827
        
      
      
        54.
        
          
            
              Kopelman
              PG
            
          
          Obesity as a medical problem
          Nature
          2000
          404
          635
          643
          
          10766250
        
      
      
        55.
        
          
            
              Kosteli
              A
            
            
              Sugaru
              E
            
            
              Haemmerle
              G
            
            
              Martin
              JF
            
            
              Lei
              J
            
            
              Zechner
              R
            
            
              Ferrante
              AW
              Jr
            
          
          Weight loss and lipolysis promote a dynamic immune response in murine adipose tissue
          J Clin Invest
          2010
          120
          3466
          3479
          10.1172/JCI42845
          
          20877011
        
      
      
        56.
        
          
            
              Kratz
              M
            
            
              Coats
              BR
            
            
              Hisert
              KB
            
            
              Hagman
              D
            
            
              Mutskov
              V
            
            
              Peris
              E
            
            
              Schoenfelt
              KQ
            
            
              Kuzma
              JN
            
            
              Larson
              I
            
            
              Billing
              PS
            
            
              Landerholm
              RW
            
            
              Crouthamel
              M
            
            
              Gozal
              D
            
            
              Hwang
              S
            
            
              Singh
              PK
            
            
              Becker
              L
            
          
          Metabolic dysfunction drives a mechanistically distinct proinflammatory phenotype in adipose tissue macrophages
          Cell Metab
          2014
          20
          614
          625
          10.1016/j.cmet.2014.08.010
          
          25242226
        
      
      
        57.
        
          
            
              Kuan
              CY
            
            
              Yang
              DD
            
            
              Samanta Roy
              DR
            
            
              Davis
              RJ
            
            
              Rakic
              P
            
            
              Flavell
              RA
            
          
          The Jnk1 and Jnk2 protein kinases are required for regional specific apoptosis during early brain development
          Neuron
          1999
          22
          667
          676
          10.1016/S0896-6273(00)80727-8
          
          10230788
        
      
      
        58.
        
          
            
              Lanthier
              N
            
            
              Molendi-Coste
              O
            
            
              Horsmans
              Y
            
            
              van Rooijen
              N
            
            
              Cani
              PD
            
            
              Leclercq
              IA
            
          
          Kupffer cell activation is a causal factor for hepatic insulin resistance
          Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol
          2010
          298
          G107
          G116
          10.1152/ajpgi.00391.2009
          
          19875703
        
      
      
        59.
        
          
            
              Lavin
              Y
            
            
              Winter
              D
            
            
              Blecher-Gonen
              R
            
            
              David
              E
            
            
              Keren-Shaul
              H
            
            
              Merad
              M
            
            
              Jung
              S
            
            
              Amit
              I
            
          
          Tissue-resident macrophage enhancer landscapes are shaped by the local microenvironment
          Cell
          2014
          159
          1312
          1326
          10.1016/j.cell.2014.11.018
          
          25480296
        
      
      
        60.
        
          
            
              Lawrence
              T
            
            
              Natoli
              G
            
          
          Transcriptional regulation of macrophage polarization: enabling diversity with identity
          Nat Rev Immunol
          2011
          11
          750
          761
          10.1038/nri3088
          
          22025054
        
      
      
        61.
        
          
            
              Lee
              CG
            
            
              Homer
              RJ
            
            
              Zhu
              Z
            
            
              Lanone
              S
            
            
              Wang
              X
            
            
              Koteliansky
              V
            
            
              Shipley
              JM
            
            
              Gotwals
              P
            
            
              Noble
              P
            
            
              Chen
              Q
            
            
              Senior
              RM
            
            
              Elias
              JA
            
          
          Interleukin-13 induces tissue fibrosis by selectively stimulating and activating transforming growth factor beta(1)
          J Exp Med
          2001
          194
          809
          821
          10.1084/jem.194.6.809
          
          11560996
        
      
      
        62.
        
          
            
              Lumeng
              CN
            
            
              Bodzin
              JL
            
            
              Saltiel
              AR
            
          
          Obesity induces a phenotypic switch in adipose tissue macrophage polarization
          J Clin Invest
          2007
          117
          175
          184
          10.1172/JCI29881
          
          17200717
        
      
      
        63.
        
          
            
              Mantovani
              A
            
            
              Sica
              A
            
            
              Sozzani
              S
            
            
              Allavena
              P
            
            
              Vecchi
              A
            
            
              Locati
              M
            
          
          The chemokine system in diverse forms of macrophage activation and polarization
          Trends Immunol
          2004
          25
          677
          686
          10.1016/j.it.2004.09.015
          
          15530839
        
      
      
        64.
        
          
            
              Mantovani
              A
            
            
              Sica
              A
            
            
              Locati
              M
            
          
          Macrophage polarization comes of age
          Immunity
          2005
          23
          344
          346
          10.1016/j.immuni.2005.10.001
          
          16226499
        
      
      
        65.
        Mass E, Ballesteros I, Farlik M, Halbritter F, Gunther P, Crozet L, Jacome-Galarza CE, Handler K, Klughammer J, Kobayashi Y, Gomez-Perdiguero E, Schultze JL, Beyer M, Bock C, Geissmann F (2016) Specification of tissue-resident macrophages during organogenesis. Science 353. doi:10.1126/science.aaf4238
      
      
        66.
        
          
            
              Mauer
              J
            
            
              Chaurasia
              B
            
            
              Plum
              L
            
            
              Quast
              T
            
            
              Hampel
              B
            
            
              Bluher
              M
            
            
              Kolanus
              W
            
            
              Kahn
              CR
            
            
              Bruning
              JC
            
          
          Myeloid cell-restricted insulin receptor deficiency protects against obesity-induced inflammation and systemic insulin resistance
          PLoS Genet
          2010
          6
          e1000938
          10.1371/journal.pgen.1000938
          
          20463885
        
      
      
        67.
        
          
            
              Mauer
              J
            
            
              Chaurasia
              B
            
            
              Goldau
              J
            
            
              Vogt
              MC
            
            
              Ruud
              J
            
            
              Nguyen
              KD
            
            
              Theurich
              S
            
            
              Hausen
              AC
            
            
              Schmitz
              J
            
            
              Bronneke
              HS
            
            
              Estevez
              E
            
            
              Allen
              TL
            
            
              Mesaros
              A
            
            
              Partridge
              L
            
            
              Febbraio
              MA
            
            
              Chawla
              A
            
            
              Wunderlich
              FT
            
            
              Bruning
              JC
            
          
          Signaling by IL-6 promotes alternative activation of macrophages to limit endotoxemia and obesity-associated resistance to insulin
          Nat Immunol
          2014
          15
          423
          430
          10.1038/ni.2865
          
          24681566
        
      
      
        68.
        
          
            
              Mauer
              J
            
            
              Denson
              JL
            
            
              Bruning
              JC
            
          
          Versatile functions for IL-6 in metabolism and cancer
          Trends Immunol
          2015
          36
          92
          101
          10.1016/j.it.2014.12.008
          
          25616716
        
      
      
        69.
        
          
            
              Mizock
              BA
            
          
          Alterations in fuel metabolism in critical illness: hyperglycaemia
          Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab
          2001
          15
          533
          551
          10.1053/beem.2001.0168
          
          11800522
        
      
      
        70.
        
          
            
              Molofsky
              AB
            
            
              Nussbaum
              JC
            
            
              Liang
              HE
            
            
              Van Dyken
              SJ
            
            
              Cheng
              LE
            
            
              Mohapatra
              A
            
            
              Chawla
              A
            
            
              Locksley
              RM
            
          
          Innate lymphoid type 2 cells sustain visceral adipose tissue eosinophils and alternatively activated macrophages
          J Exp Med
          2013
          210
          535
          549
          10.1084/jem.20121964
          
          23420878
        
      
      
        71.
        
          
            
              Morinaga
              H
            
            
              Mayoral
              R
            
            
              Heinrichsdorff
              J
            
            
              Osborn
              O
            
            
              Franck
              N
            
            
              Hah
              N
            
            
              Walenta
              E
            
            
              Bandyopadhyay
              G
            
            
              Pessentheiner
              AR
            
            
              Chi
              TJ
            
            
              Chung
              H
            
            
              Bogner-Strauss
              JG
            
            
              Evans
              RM
            
            
              Olefsky
              JM
            
            
              Oh
              DY
            
          
          Characterization of distinct subpopulations of hepatic macrophages in HFD/obese mice
          Diabetes
          2015
          64
          1120
          1130
          10.2337/db14-1238
          
          25315009
        
      
      
        72.
        
          
            
              Mosser
              DM
            
            
              Edwards
              JP
            
          
          Exploring the full spectrum of macrophage activation
          Nat Rev Immunol
          2008
          8
          958
          969
          10.1038/nri2448
          
          19029990
        
      
      
        73.
        
          
            
              Murray
              PJ
            
            
              Wynn
              TA
            
          
          Protective and pathogenic functions of macrophage subsets
          Nat Rev Immunol
          2011
          11
          723
          737
          10.1038/nri3073
          
          21997792
        
      
      
        74.
        
          
            
              Neuschwander-Tetri
              BA
            
          
          Hepatic lipotoxicity and the pathogenesis of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: the central role of nontriglyceride fatty acid metabolites
          Hepatology
          2010
          52
          774
          788
          10.1002/hep.23719
          
          20683968
        
      
      
        75.
        
          
            
              Nguyen
              KD
            
            
              Qiu
              Y
            
            
              Cui
              X
            
            
              Goh
              YP
            
            
              Mwangi
              J
            
            
              David
              T
            
            
              Mukundan
              L
            
            
              Brombacher
              F
            
            
              Locksley
              RM
            
            
              Chawla
              A
            
          
          Alternatively activated macrophages produce catecholamines to sustain adaptive thermogenesis
          Nature
          2011
          480
          104
          108
          10.1038/nature10653
          
          22101429
        
      
      
        76.
        
          
            
              Nicholas
              SA
            
            
              Sumbayev
              VV
            
          
          The role of redox-dependent mechanisms in the downregulation of ligand-induced toll-like receptors 7, 8 and 4-mediated HIF-1 alpha prolyl hydroxylation
          Immunol Cell Biol
          2010
          88
          180
          186
          10.1038/icb.2009.76
          
          19841637
        
      
      
        77.
        
          
            
              Nieto-Vazquez
              I
            
            
              Fernandez-Veledo
              S
            
            
              Kramer
              DK
            
            
              Vila-Bedmar
              R
            
            
              Garcia-Guerra
              L
            
            
              Lorenzo
              M
            
          
          Insulin resistance associated to obesity: the link TNF-alpha
          Arch Physiol Biochem
          2008
          114
          183
          194
          10.1080/13813450802181047
          
          18629684
        
      
      
        78.
        
          
            
              Nishimura
              S
            
            
              Manabe
              I
            
            
              Nagasaki
              M
            
            
              Eto
              K
            
            
              Yamashita
              H
            
            
              Ohsugi
              M
            
            
              Otsu
              M
            
            
              Hara
              K
            
            
              Ueki
              K
            
            
              Sugiura
              S
            
            
              Yoshimura
              K
            
            
              Kadowaki
              T
            
            
              Nagai
              R
            
          
          CD8+ effector T cells contribute to macrophage recruitment and adipose tissue inflammation in obesity
          Nat Med
          2009
          15
          914
          920
          10.1038/nm.1964
          
          19633658
        
      
      
        79.
        
          
            
              Odegaard
              JI
            
            
              Ricardo-Gonzalez
              RR
            
            
              Goforth
              MH
            
            
              Morel
              CR
            
            
              Subramanian
              V
            
            
              Mukundan
              L
            
            
              Red Eagle
              A
            
            
              Vats
              D
            
            
              Brombacher
              F
            
            
              Ferrante
              AW
            
            
              Chawla
              A
            
          
          Macrophage-specific PPARgamma controls alternative activation and improves insulin resistance
          Nature
          2007
          447
          1116
          1120
          10.1038/nature05894
          
          17515919
        
      
      
        80.
        
          
            
              Oh
              DY
            
            
              Talukdar
              S
            
            
              Bae
              EJ
            
            
              Imamura
              T
            
            
              Morinaga
              H
            
            
              Fan
              W
            
            
              Li
              P
            
            
              Lu
              WJ
            
            
              Watkins
              SM
            
            
              Olefsky
              JM
            
          
          GPR120 is an omega-3 fatty acid receptor mediating potent anti-inflammatory and insulin-sensitizing effects
          Cell
          2010
          142
          687
          698
          10.1016/j.cell.2010.07.041
          
          20813258
        
      
      
        81.
        
          
            
              Okabe
              Y
            
            
              Medzhitov
              R
            
          
          Tissue-specific signals control reversible program of localization and functional polarization of macrophages
          Cell
          2014
          157
          832
          844
          10.1016/j.cell.2014.04.016
          
          24792964
        
      
      
        82.
        
          
            
              Olefsky
              JM
            
            
              Glass
              CK
            
          
          Macrophages, inflammation, and insulin resistance
          Annu Rev Physiol
          2010
          72
          219
          246
          10.1146/annurev-physiol-021909-135846
          
          20148674
        
      
      
        83.
        
          
            
              O’Neill
              LA
            
            
              Kishton
              RJ
            
            
              Rathmell
              J
            
          
          A guide to immunometabolism for immunologists
          Nat Rev Immunol
          2016
          16
          553
          565
          10.1038/nri.2016.70
          
          27396447
        
      
      
        84.
        
          
            
              Pal
              M
            
            
              Wunderlich
              CM
            
            
              Spohn
              G
            
            
              Bronneke
              HS
            
            
              Schmidt-Supprian
              M
            
            
              Wunderlich
              FT
            
          
          Alteration of JNK-1 signaling in skeletal muscle fails to affect glucose homeostasis and obesity-associated insulin resistance in mice
          PLoS One
          2013
          8
          e54247
          10.1371/journal.pone.0054247
          
          23349837
        
      
      
        85.
        
          
            
              Poglio
              S
            
            
              De Toni
              F
            
            
              Lewandowski
              D
            
            
              Minot
              A
            
            
              Arnaud
              E
            
            
              Barroca
              V
            
            
              Laharrague
              P
            
            
              Casteilla
              L
            
            
              Cousin
              B
            
          
          In situ production of innate immune cells in murine white adipose tissue
          Blood
          2012
          120
          4952
          4962
          10.1182/blood-2012-01-406959
          
          23071275
        
      
      
        86.
        
          
            
              Poltorak
              MP
            
            
              Schraml
              BU
            
          
          Fate mapping of dendritic cells
          Front Immunol
          2015
          6
          199
          10.3389/fimmu.2015.00199
          
          25999945
        
      
      
        87.
        
          
            
              Reilly
              SM
            
            
              Ahmadian
              M
            
            
              Zamarron
              BF
            
            
              Chang
              L
            
            
              Uhm
              M
            
            
              Poirier
              B
            
            
              Peng
              X
            
            
              Krause
              DM
            
            
              Korytnaya
              E
            
            
              Neidert
              A
            
            
              Liddle
              C
            
            
              Yu
              RT
            
            
              Lumeng
              CN
            
            
              Oral
              EA
            
            
              Downes
              M
            
            
              Evans
              RM
            
            
              Saltiel
              AR
            
          
          A subcutaneous adipose tissue-liver signalling axis controls hepatic gluconeogenesis
          Nat Commun
          2015
          6
          6047
          10.1038/ncomms7047
          
          25581158
        
      
      
        88.
        
          
            
              Robinson
              MW
            
            
              Harmon
              C
            
            
              O’Farrelly
              C
            
          
          Liver immunology and its role in inflammation and homeostasis
          Cell Mol Immunol
          2016
          13
          267
          276
          10.1038/cmi.2016.3
          
          27063467
        
      
      
        89.
        
          
            
              Rohl
              M
            
            
              Pasparakis
              M
            
            
              Baudler
              S
            
            
              Baumgartl
              J
            
            
              Gautam
              D
            
            
              Huth
              M
            
            
              De Lorenzi
              R
            
            
              Krone
              W
            
            
              Rajewsky
              K
            
            
              Bruning
              JC
            
          
          Conditional disruption of IkappaB kinase 2 fails to prevent obesity-induced insulin resistance
          J Clin Invest
          2004
          113
          474
          481
          10.1172/JCI200418712
          
          14755344
        
      
      
        90.
        
          
            
              Rosas
              M
            
            
              Davies
              LC
            
            
              Giles
              PJ
            
            
              Liao
              CT
            
            
              Kharfan
              B
            
            
              Stone
              TC
            
            
              O’Donnell
              VB
            
            
              Fraser
              DJ
            
            
              Jones
              SA
            
            
              Taylor
              PR
            
          
          The transcription factor Gata6 links tissue macrophage phenotype and proliferative renewal
          Science
          2014
          344
          645
          648
          10.1126/science.1251414
          
          24762537
        
      
      
        91.
        
          
            
              Ruiz-Garcia
              A
            
            
              Monsalve
              E
            
            
              Novellasdemunt
              L
            
            
              Navarro-Sabate
              A
            
            
              Manzano
              A
            
            
              Rivero
              S
            
            
              Castrillo
              A
            
            
              Casado
              M
            
            
              Laborda
              J
            
            
              Bartrons
              R
            
            
              Diaz-Guerra
              MJ
            
          
          Cooperation of adenosine with macrophage toll-4 receptor agonists leads to increased glycolytic flux through the enhanced expression of PFKFB3 gene
          J Biol Chem
          2011
          286
          19247
          19258
          10.1074/jbc.M110.190298
          
          21464136
        
      
      
        92.
        
          
            
              Sabio
              G
            
            
              Das
              M
            
            
              Mora
              A
            
            
              Zhang
              Z
            
            
              Jun
              JY
            
            
              Ko
              HJ
            
            
              Barrett
              T
            
            
              Kim
              JK
            
            
              Davis
              RJ
            
          
          A stress signaling pathway in adipose tissue regulates hepatic insulin resistance
          Science
          2008
          322
          1539
          1543
          10.1126/science.1160794
          
          19056984
        
      
      
        93.
        
          
            
              Saltiel
              AR
            
          
          Insulin signaling in the control of glucose and lipid homeostasis
          Handb Exp Pharmacol
          2016
          233
          51
          71
          10.1007/164_2015_14
          
          26721672
        
      
      
        94.
        
          
            
              Scheller
              J
            
            
              Chalaris
              A
            
            
              Schmidt-Arras
              D
            
            
              Rose-John
              S
            
          
          The pro- and anti-inflammatory properties of the cytokine interleukin-6
          Biochim Biophys Acta
          2011
          1813
          878
          888
          10.1016/j.bbamcr.2011.01.034
          
          21296109
        
      
      
        95.
        
          
            
              Schmitz
              J
            
            
              Evers
              N
            
            
              Awazawa
              M
            
            
              Nicholls
              HT
            
            
              Bronneke
              HS
            
            
              Dietrich
              A
            
            
              Mauer
              J
            
            
              Bluher
              M
            
            
              Bruning
              JC
            
          
          Obesogenic memory can confer long-term increases in adipose tissue but not liver inflammation and insulin resistance after weight loss
          Mol Metab
          2016
          5
          328
          339
          10.1016/j.molmet.2015.12.001
          
          27110485
        
      
      
        96.
        
          
            
              Schulz
              C
            
            
              Gomez Perdiguero
              E
            
            
              Chorro
              L
            
            
              Szabo-Rogers
              H
            
            
              Cagnard
              N
            
            
              Kierdorf
              K
            
            
              Prinz
              M
            
            
              Wu
              B
            
            
              Jacobsen
              SE
            
            
              Pollard
              JW
            
            
              Frampton
              J
            
            
              Liu
              KJ
            
            
              Geissmann
              F
            
          
          A lineage of myeloid cells independent of Myb and hematopoietic stem cells
          Science
          2012
          336
          86
          90
          10.1126/science.1219179
          
          22442384
        
      
      
        97.
        
          
            
              Selak
              MA
            
            
              Armour
              SM
            
            
              MacKenzie
              ED
            
            
              Boulahbel
              H
            
            
              Watson
              DG
            
            
              Mansfield
              KD
            
            
              Pan
              Y
            
            
              Simon
              MC
            
            
              Thompson
              CB
            
            
              Gottlieb
              E
            
          
          Succinate links TCA cycle dysfunction to oncogenesis by inhibiting HIF-alpha prolyl hydroxylase
          Cancer Cell
          2005
          7
          77
          85
          10.1016/j.ccr.2004.11.022
          
          15652751
        
      
      
        98.
        
          
            
              Sheng
              J
            
            
              Ruedl
              C
            
            
              Karjalainen
              K
            
          
          Most tissue-resident macrophages except microglia are derived from fetal hematopoietic stem cells
          Immunity
          2015
          43
          382
          393
          10.1016/j.immuni.2015.07.016
          
          26287683
        
      
      
        99.
        
          
            
              Siegert
              I
            
            
              Schodel
              J
            
            
              Nairz
              M
            
            
              Schatz
              V
            
            
              Dettmer
              K
            
            
              Dick
              C
            
            
              Kalucka
              J
            
            
              Franke
              K
            
            
              Ehrenschwender
              M
            
            
              Schley
              G
            
            
              Beneke
              A
            
            
              Sutter
              J
            
            
              Moll
              M
            
            
              Hellerbrand
              C
            
            
              Wielockx
              B
            
            
              Katschinski
              DM
            
            
              Lang
              R
            
            
              Galy
              B
            
            
              Hentze
              MW
            
            
              Koivunen
              P
            
            
              Oefner
              PJ
            
            
              Bogdan
              C
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
            
              Willam
              C
            
            
              Jantsch
              J
            
          
          Ferritin-mediated iron sequestration stabilizes hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha upon LPS activation in the presence of ample oxygen
          Cell Rep
          2015
          13
          2048
          2055
          10.1016/j.celrep.2015.11.005
          
          26628374
        
      
      
        100.
        
          
            
              Sierra-Filardi
              E
            
            
              Vega
              MA
            
            
              Sanchez-Mateos
              P
            
            
              Corbi
              AL
            
            
              Puig-Kroger
              A
            
          
          Heme oxygenase-1 expression in M-CSF-polarized M2 macrophages contributes to LPS-induced IL-10 release
          Immunobiology
          2010
          215
          788
          795
          10.1016/j.imbio.2010.05.020
          
          20580464
        
      
      
        101.
        
          
            
              Tang
              F
            
            
              Tang
              G
            
            
              Xiang
              J
            
            
              Dai
              Q
            
            
              Rosner
              MR
            
            
              Lin
              A
            
          
          The absence of NF-kappaB-mediated inhibition of c-Jun N-terminal kinase activation contributes to tumor necrosis factor alpha-induced apoptosis
          Mol Cell Biol
          2002
          22
          8571
          8579
          10.1128/MCB.22.24.8571-8579.2002
          
          12446776
        
      
      
        102.
        
          
            
              Tannahill
              GM
            
            
              Curtis
              AM
            
            
              Adamik
              J
            
            
              Palsson-McDermott
              EM
            
            
              McGettrick
              AF
            
            
              Goel
              G
            
            
              Frezza
              C
            
            
              Bernard
              NJ
            
            
              Kelly
              B
            
            
              Foley
              NH
            
            
              Zheng
              L
            
            
              Gardet
              A
            
            
              Tong
              Z
            
            
              Jany
              SS
            
            
              Corr
              SC
            
            
              Haneklaus
              M
            
            
              Caffrey
              BE
            
            
              Pierce
              K
            
            
              Walmsley
              S
            
            
              Beasley
              FC
            
            
              Cummins
              E
            
            
              Nizet
              V
            
            
              Whyte
              M
            
            
              Taylor
              CT
            
            
              Lin
              H
            
            
              Masters
              SL
            
            
              Gottlieb
              E
            
            
              Kelly
              VP
            
            
              Clish
              C
            
            
              Auron
              PE
            
            
              Xavier
              RJ
            
            
              O’Neill
              LA
            
          
          Succinate is an inflammatory signal that induces IL-1beta through HIF-1alpha
          Nature
          2013
          496
          238
          242
          10.1038/nature11986
          
          23535595
        
      
      
        103.
        
          
            
              Torisu
              T
            
            
              Sato
              N
            
            
              Yoshiga
              D
            
            
              Kobayashi
              T
            
            
              Yoshioka
              T
            
            
              Mori
              H
            
            
              Iida
              M
            
            
              Yoshimura
              A
            
          
          The dual function of hepatic SOCS3 in insulin resistance in vivo
          Genes Cells
          2007
          12
          143
          154
          10.1111/j.1365-2443.2007.01044.x
          
          17295835
        
      
      
        104.
        
          
            
              Ueki
              K
            
            
              Kondo
              T
            
            
              Kahn
              CR
            
          
          Suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS-1) and SOCS-3 cause insulin resistance through inhibition of tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate proteins by discrete mechanisms
          Mol Cell Biol
          2004
          24
          5434
          5446
          10.1128/MCB.24.12.5434-5446.2004
          
          15169905
        
      
      
        105.
        
          
            
              Ueki
              K
            
            
              Kondo
              T
            
            
              Tseng
              YH
            
            
              Kahn
              CR
            
          
          Central role of suppressors of cytokine signaling proteins in hepatic steatosis, insulin resistance, and the metabolic syndrome in the mouse
          Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
          2004
          101
          10422
          10427
          10.1073/pnas.0402511101
          
          15240880
        
      
      
        106.
        
          
            
              Uysal
              KT
            
            
              Wiesbrock
              SM
            
            
              Marino
              MW
            
            
              Hotamisligil
              GS
            
          
          Protection from obesity-induced insulin resistance in mice lacking TNF-alpha function
          Nature
          1997
          389
          610
          614
          10.1038/39335
          
          9335502
        
      
      
        107.
        
          
            
              van Herpen
              NA
            
            
              Schrauwen-Hinderling
              VB
            
          
          Lipid accumulation in non-adipose tissue and lipotoxicity
          Physiol Behav
          2008
          94
          231
          241
          10.1016/j.physbeh.2007.11.049
          
          18222498
        
      
      
        108.
        
          
            
              Vander Heiden
              MG
            
            
              Cantley
              LC
            
            
              Thompson
              CB
            
          
          Understanding the Warburg effect: the metabolic requirements of cell proliferation
          Science
          2009
          324
          1029
          1033
          10.1126/science.1160809
          
          19460998
        
      
      
        109.
        
          
            
              Vats
              D
            
            
              Mukundan
              L
            
            
              Odegaard
              JI
            
            
              Zhang
              L
            
            
              Smith
              KL
            
            
              Morel
              CR
            
            
              Wagner
              RA
            
            
              Greaves
              DR
            
            
              Murray
              PJ
            
            
              Chawla
              A
            
          
          Oxidative metabolism and PGC-1beta attenuate macrophage-mediated inflammation
          Cell Metab
          2006
          4
          13
          24
          10.1016/j.cmet.2006.05.011
          
          16814729
        
      
      
        110.
        
          
            
              Vernia
              S
            
            
              Cavanagh-Kyros
              J
            
            
              Garcia-Haro
              L
            
            
              Sabio
              G
            
            
              Barrett
              T
            
            
              Jung
              DY
            
            
              Kim
              JK
            
            
              Xu
              J
            
            
              Shulha
              HP
            
            
              Garber
              M
            
            
              Gao
              G
            
            
              Davis
              RJ
            
          
          The PPARalpha-FGF21 hormone axis contributes to metabolic regulation by the hepatic JNK signaling pathway
          Cell Metab
          2014
          20
          512
          525
          10.1016/j.cmet.2014.06.010
          
          25043817
        
      
      
        111.
        
          
            
              Wallenius
              V
            
            
              Wallenius
              K
            
            
              Ahren
              B
            
            
              Rudling
              M
            
            
              Carlsten
              H
            
            
              Dickson
              SL
            
            
              Ohlsson
              C
            
            
              Jansson
              JO
            
          
          Interleukin-6-deficient mice develop mature-onset obesity
          Nat Med
          2002
          8
          75
          79
          10.1038/nm0102-75
          
          11786910
        
      
      
        112.
        
          
            
              Weisberg
              SP
            
            
              McCann
              D
            
            
              Desai
              M
            
            
              Rosenbaum
              M
            
            
              Leibel
              RL
            
            
              Ferrante
              AW
              Jr
            
          
          Obesity is associated with macrophage accumulation in adipose tissue
          J Clin Invest
          2003
          112
          1796
          1808
          10.1172/JCI200319246
          
          14679176
        
      
      
        113.
        
          
            
              Weisberg
              SP
            
            
              Hunter
              D
            
            
              Huber
              R
            
            
              Lemieux
              J
            
            
              Slaymaker
              S
            
            
              Vaddi
              K
            
            
              Charo
              I
            
            
              Leibel
              RL
            
            
              Ferrante
              AW
              Jr
            
          
          CCR2 modulates inflammatory and metabolic effects of high-fat feeding
          J Clin Invest
          2006
          116
          115
          124
          10.1172/JCI24335
          
          16341265
        
      
      
        114.
        
          
            
              Wensveen
              FM
            
            
              Jelencic
              V
            
            
              Valentic
              S
            
            
              Sestan
              M
            
            
              Wensveen
              TT
            
            
              Theurich
              S
            
            
              Glasner
              A
            
            
              Mendrila
              D
            
            
              Stimac
              D
            
            
              Wunderlich
              FT
            
            
              Bruning
              JC
            
            
              Mandelboim
              O
            
            
              Polic
              B
            
          
          NK cells link obesity-induced adipose stress to inflammation and insulin resistance
          Nat Immunol
          2015
          16
          376
          385
          10.1038/ni.3120
          
          25729921
        
      
      
        115.
        
          
            
              West
              AP
            
            
              Brodsky
              IE
            
            
              Rahner
              C
            
            
              Woo
              DK
            
            
              Erdjument-Bromage
              H
            
            
              Tempst
              P
            
            
              Walsh
              MC
            
            
              Choi
              Y
            
            
              Shadel
              GS
            
            
              Ghosh
              S
            
          
          TLR signalling augments macrophage bactericidal activity through mitochondrial ROS
          Nature
          2011
          472
          476
          480
          10.1038/nature09973
          
          21525932
        
      
      
        116.
        
          
            
              Whitham
              M
            
            
              Chan
              MH
            
            
              Pal
              M
            
            
              Matthews
              VB
            
            
              Prelovsek
              O
            
            
              Lunke
              S
            
            
              El-Osta
              A
            
            
              Broenneke
              H
            
            
              Alber
              J
            
            
              Bruning
              JC
            
            
              Wunderlich
              FT
            
            
              Lancaster
              GI
            
            
              Febbraio
              MA
            
          
          Contraction-induced interleukin-6 gene transcription in skeletal muscle is regulated by c-Jun terminal kinase/activator protein-1
          J Biol Chem
          2012
          287
          10771
          10779
          10.1074/jbc.M111.310581
          
          22351769
        
      
      
        117.
        
          
            
              Winer
              S
            
            
              Chan
              Y
            
            
              Paltser
              G
            
            
              Truong
              D
            
            
              Tsui
              H
            
            
              Bahrami
              J
            
            
              Dorfman
              R
            
            
              Wang
              Y
            
            
              Zielenski
              J
            
            
              Mastronardi
              F
            
            
              Maezawa
              Y
            
            
              Drucker
              DJ
            
            
              Engleman
              E
            
            
              Winer
              D
            
            
              Dosch
              HM
            
          
          Normalization of obesity-associated insulin resistance through immunotherapy
          Nat Med
          2009
          15
          921
          929
          10.1038/nm.2001
          
          19633657
        
      
      
        118.
        
          
            
              Wree
              A
            
            
              Kahraman
              A
            
            
              Gerken
              G
            
            
              Canbay
              A
            
          
          Obesity affects the liver - the link between adipocytes and hepatocytes
          Digestion
          2011
          83
          124
          133
          10.1159/000318741
          
          21042023
        
      
      
        119.
        
          
            
              Wunderlich
              FT
            
            
              Luedde
              T
            
            
              Singer
              S
            
            
              Schmidt-Supprian
              M
            
            
              Baumgartl
              J
            
            
              Schirmacher
              P
            
            
              Pasparakis
              M
            
            
              Bruning
              JC
            
          
          Hepatic NF-kappa B essential modulator deficiency prevents obesity-induced insulin resistance but synergizes with high-fat feeding in tumorigenesis
          Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
          2008
          105
          1297
          1302
          10.1073/pnas.0707849104
          
          18216263
        
      
      
        120.
        
          
            
              Wunderlich
              FT
            
            
              Strohle
              P
            
            
              Konner
              AC
            
            
              Gruber
              S
            
            
              Tovar
              S
            
            
              Bronneke
              HS
            
            
              Juntti-Berggren
              L
            
            
              Li
              LS
            
            
              van Rooijen
              N
            
            
              Libert
              C
            
            
              Berggren
              PO
            
            
              Bruning
              JC
            
          
          Interleukin-6 signaling in liver-parenchymal cells suppresses hepatic inflammation and improves systemic insulin action
          Cell Metab
          2010
          12
          237
          249
          10.1016/j.cmet.2010.06.011
          
          20816090
        
      
      
        121.
        
          
            
              Wunderlich
              CM
            
            
              Hovelmeyer
              N
            
            
              Wunderlich
              FT
            
          
          Mechanisms of chronic JAK-STAT3-SOCS3 signaling in obesity
          JAKSTAT
          2013
          2
          e23878
          
          24058813
        
      
      
        122.
        
          
            
              Xu
              H
            
            
              Barnes
              GT
            
            
              Yang
              Q
            
            
              Tan
              G
            
            
              Yang
              D
            
            
              Chou
              CJ
            
            
              Sole
              J
            
            
              Nichols
              A
            
            
              Ross
              JS
            
            
              Tartaglia
              LA
            
            
              Chen
              H
            
          
          Chronic inflammation in fat plays a crucial role in the development of obesity-related insulin resistance
          J Clin Invest
          2003
          112
          1821
          1830
          10.1172/JCI200319451
          
          14679177
        
      
      
        123.
        
          
            
              Xu
              X
            
            
              Grijalva
              A
            
            
              Skowronski
              A
            
            
              van Eijk
              M
            
            
              Serlie
              MJ
            
            
              Ferrante
              AW
              Jr
            
          
          Obesity activates a program of lysosomal-dependent lipid metabolism in adipose tissue macrophages independently of classic activation
          Cell Metab
          2013
          18
          816
          830
          10.1016/j.cmet.2013.11.001
          
          24315368
        
      
      
        124.
        
          
            
              Yona
              S
            
            
              Kim
              KW
            
            
              Wolf
              Y
            
            
              Mildner
              A
            
            
              Varol
              D
            
            
              Breker
              M
            
            
              Strauss-Ayali
              D
            
            
              Viukov
              S
            
            
              Guilliams
              M
            
            
              Misharin
              A
            
            
              Hume
              DA
            
            
              Perlman
              H
            
            
              Malissen
              B
            
            
              Zelzer
              E
            
            
              Jung
              S
            
          
          Fate mapping reveals origins and dynamics of monocytes and tissue macrophages under homeostasis
          Immunity
          2013
          38
          79
          91
          10.1016/j.immuni.2012.12.001
          
          23273845
        
      
    
  
