oai:pubmedcentral.nih.gov:53626622017-04-04springeropenpmc-open
Duodenal cytochrome b and hephaestin expression in patients with iron deficiency and hemochromatosis

    
      Systemic aspects of iron recycling
      The mononuclear phagocyte system (MPS) encompasses monocytes and macrophages residing throughout the body [9, 82, 85]. A central role of this multifunctional system beyond immunity and tissue repair is to control the body’s metabolic needs for iron. The maintenance of iron homeostasis at the systemic level requires iron recycling (Fig. 1), much of which is contained in senescent red blood cells (RBC). This is a prerequisite for sufficient de novo synthesis of hemoglobin (Hb) in the bone marrow (BM), a process which consumes as much as 20–25 mg of iron per day [78, 179]. The capacity of the small intestine to absorb dietary iron, in comparison to the daily needs of iron, is rather low; in humans under steady-state conditions, 1–2 mg of iron is absorbed from the diet in the duodenum and upper jejunum. Thus, dietary iron absorption only compensates for obligatory losses of the metal, mainly through desquamation of the epidermis and the intestinal epithelium, and menstrual bleeding [168].Fig. 1
a In steady state, 20–25 mg/day of iron is needed to generate new red blood cells (RBC) in the bone marrow (depicted as vertebral body). The RBC of an adult human form the body’s largest iron pool (1500–2500 mg contained in hemoglobin [Hb]). After an average lifetime of 120 days, aged RBC (aRBC) are trapped in the spleen, recognized by red pulp macrophages (RPM), and eliminated. Their Hb is recycled, and ferroportin (Fpn)-1 exports iron into sinusoidal capillaries where it is loaded onto transferrin (TF). TF-bound iron is utilized by developing erythroblasts (EB) via TF receptor (Tfr)-1. Erythroid island macrophages assist in iron uptake and differentiation. Plasma iron content is sensed by hepatocytes, presumably via Tfr1 and other iron-sensitive molecules. They affect the transcriptional activation of hepcidin, the major iron hormone, in hepatocytes. Hepcidin acts as negative feedback regulator of iron influx by targeting Fpn1 resulting in degradation of the latter and thus reduction of iron transfer from the diet and macrophages to the plasma. Kupffer cells (KC) inhibit hepcidin expression by hepatocytes and also engage in erythrophagocytosis. b The lifespan of RBC can be reduced as a consequence of autoinflammation and subsequent hemolysis, radical formation and toxin activity or based on intrinsic structural or metabolic defects. The rapid accumulation of damaged RBC (dRBC) may overwhelm the spleen’s clearance capacity. In such a scenario, KC engulf dRBC which may result in cell death. As back-up system, monocytes are recruited from the bone marrow and possibly spleen via chemokines CCL2 and CCL3 and their receptor CCR2. These monocytes encounter a niche in the liver and differentiate into KC-like cells that express Fpn1 which is induced by several mechanisms including the growth factor macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF). Fpn1-mediated iron export sustains increased erythropoiesis in the bone marrow to compensate for losses by RBC damage

      Intestinal iron absorption is regulated, to a large extent, at the basolateral membrane of enterocytes [59, 248]. It is at this location that ferroportin-1 (Fpn1; AKA solute carrier family 40 member 1) fulfills its function as the sole cellular efflux protein for ionic iron, shuttling apically absorbed iron to the circulation, where it is oxidized and loaded onto transferrin (TF) [173]. The presence of Fpn1 in the absorptive epithelium is under negative control of hepcidin, which is mainly secreted by hepatocytes in response to high circulating and tissue amounts of iron or upon stimulation by inflammatory mediators [171, 229]. This negative feedback loop exists because of the Janus-faced nature of iron. Iron forms the central cation of hemoglobin, other heme-containing proteins (such as myoglobin and cytochrome P450 enzymes including the mitochondrial electron transport chain), and iron-sulfur cluster-containing enzymes found in most cells [179, 180]. Free labile forms of iron and heme, however, are potentially toxic and threaten tissue integrity due to their pro-oxidative properties which are largely based on the capacity of iron to non-enzymatically boost reactive oxygen species (ROS) production via Fenton chemistry [89, 119].
      Given its essential role in metabolism and cellular processes such as mitochondrial respiration, an efficient and tightly controlled pathway for maintaining iron in the body must exist and likely depends on factors controlling the recognition, uptake, and degradation of erythrocytes by macrophages [113]. In steady-state conditions, RBC recycling mainly takes place in the spleen [48, 213]. In conditions of excessive RBC damage, liver macrophages (Kupffer cells, henceforward abbreviated as KC) dominate RBC clearance (as detailed in “Liver—the iron regulatory organ” section) [231].
      During massive hemolysis, circulating hemoglobin (Hb) and heme are bound by hemopexin (HPX) and haptoglobin, respectively, to avoid intravasal radical formation via the catalytic action of iron [203, 235, 244]. However, when the capacity of red pulp macrophages (the iron-recycling macrophage population in the spleen, henceforward abbreviated as RPM) and KC is overwhelmed, the cells die, presumably by a specific form of cell death called ferroptosis that is induced by iron-mediated oxidative stress and lipid peroxidation [54]. To compensate, blood-derived monocytes fill the partial niche after KC loss and differentiate into a transient macrophage population that has a unique phenotype including the high expression of the CC-chemokine receptor 2 (CCR2) [231]. Indeed, monocyte recruitment from the BM to the liver is mediated by a liver-specific, KC-derived CC-chemokine gradient of CCL2 and CCL3 that attracts CCR2+ CCR5+ monocytes to the organ. As a consequence, the BM enhances myelopoiesis and releases additional monocytes to the circulation to meet the increased demand (Fig. 1b). This chemokine-mediated monocyte recruitment is essential because if disrupted pharmacologically, damaged RBC accumulate in glomerular capillaries resulting in renal failure [231]. Comparable phenomena of KC death, although necroptotic by nature, and replacement of KCs from BM-derived monocytes have been reported in Listeria monocytogenes infection [21] raising the possibility that the mechanism is a general stress response that can be fine tuned according to whether the initial stressor is endogenous (e.g., RBC, heme) or exogenous (e.g., a pathogen).
      In theory, additional mechanisms by which macrophages may influence systemic iron homeostasis (other than its recycling) include control of dietary iron absorption or excretion. It is generally thought that no regulated pathway of iron excretion exists in the mammalian organism. Duodenal iron absorption, however, appears to rely on macrophages, albeit indirectly via modulating hepcidin production by hepatocytes (see “Liver—the iron regulatory organ” section). To the best of our knowledge, no data exist on whether lamina propria macrophages in the small intestine affect absorptive enterocyte iron transporter expression or function, although this is possible given that macrophages produce small amounts of hepcidin in response to inflammatory stimuli [185, 227]. However, one might speculate that intestinal infection might alter absorption by shifting intestinal stem cell differentiation towards non-absorptive progeny such as Paneth or Tuft cells and by promoting recruitment of inflammatory macrophages [39, 64]. Although hypothetical, such a mechanism might be initiated by myeloid cells since lamina propria macrophages and dendritic cells (DCs) will be one of the first cell types to engage in host response to invasive pathogens [125].
      
        Erythrophagocytosis
        The physiologic senescence of RBC is associated with mechanical and biochemical alterations of their membrane such as reduced flexibility, exposure of phosphatidylserine on their surface, and clustering of band 3 followed by binding of antibodies and complement [97, 237]. The microanatomy of splenic sinusoidal capillaries prevents the unhindered passage of these senescent RBC. Macrophages, however, recognize cell surface markers of senescence via scavenger receptors such as Tim4, SR-AI, and CD36 [114, 155, 156, 202, 251]. Damaged and aged RBC are engulfed by RPM (flow cytometrically phenotyped as F4/80low CD11blow Fpn1+) and phagocytosed. The molecular machinery of RBC recycling is relatively well described, and its function is essential to tissue integrity given the pro-oxidative capacity of free labile heme. This capacity is potentiated by the extraordinarily high number of about 1.2 × 109 heme moieties contained within a single RBC and the fact that RBC are the body’s most abundant cell type comprising approximately 84% of our cells [118, 208]. It thus appears conceivable that a stand-by mechanism for heme detoxification exists: The molecular switch to turn on the protective pathways within cells is the transcriptional repressor Btb and Cnc homology 1 (Bach1). Bach1 is a basic leucine zipper (bZip) transcriptional factor which has a high affinity for heme, enabling it to act as a sensor of cellular heme levels. Rising heme levels induce Bach1 proteosomal degradation, releasing the brake on two types of down-stream pathways. First, the competitive inhibition of nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (Nrf2) binding to antioxidant-response elements (ARE) ceases for genes containing AREs [51, 145, 221], such as ferritin h chain (FTH), FPN1, heme-regulated gene-1 (HRG1), and heme oxygenase (Hmox1) [102, 190]. Second, the degradation of Bach1 induces expression of the transcription factor (an E26 transformation-specific transcription factor of the Spi subfamily) SpiC independently of Nrf2 [116, 211]. SpiC is a transcription factor that is predominately expressed by RPM and erythroid island macrophages (EIM) in the BM [88]. It is essential to the development of these cell types as Spic
−/− mice have drastically reduced numbers of RPM and EIM which lead to reduced proerythroblast numbers in the steady state, supporting the idea that iron recycling is essential to sustain iron-sufficient erythropoiesis [58].
        Hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) provide an alternative mechanism to adjust heme iron recycling by macrophages to the degree of anemia and the need for de novo Hb synthesis. Anemia inevitably results in low oxygen concentrations in the tissue microenvironment which counteract HIF degradation in the proteasome so that these transcription factors become available to trans-activate genes containing hypoxia-responsive elements (HREs). HIF-HRE interaction in response to hypoxia thus stimulates iron release from macrophages by inducing Hmox1 and Fpn1 as well as one of its associated ferroxidases, ceruloplasmin [37, 63, 200]. Although many genes involved in heme iron recycling are thus HIF-inducible, HIF-1α and HIF-2α in macrophages are dispensable for heme iron recycling under hemolytic stress [147]. This suggests that HIF isoforms fulfill redundant functions in macrophages or that they are not essential because Bach1-controlled pathways are dominant.
        Bach1 is not the only cellular sensor for heme. Intracellular free heme can also induce signaling via nuclear receptors Rev-Erbα and Rev-Erbß [29, 132, 187]. Furthermore, the inflammasome activation via cryopyrin (AKA NLRP3) is sensitive to surplus intracellular heme while extracellular free heme can activate Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), supporting the idea that free heme is an endogenous danger signal [60, 65, 66, 131]. Given its inherent potential toxicity, the majority of free intracellular heme is promptly degraded by Hmox. Hmox1, which itself is induced via Nrf2 in response to heme or other oxidative stressors, is widely expressed in the MPS. Hmox2, by contrast, is a constitutive isoform carrying important functions in the nervous and reproductive systems [89]. Both Hmox isoenzymes cleave heme’s protoporphyrin ring which yields bilirubin, carbon monoxide, and iron in equimolar amounts. The iron released during this process is either stored within ferritin (FT), incorporated into iron-containing proteins, or shuttled to the extracellular space via Fpn1. Outside the cell, ferrous iron needs to be oxidized to its ferric form by cell membrane-anchored hephaestin or plasmatic ceruloplasmin. Thereafter, ferric iron can be bound to transferrin (TF) and the bulk of it will re-enter the BM and be utilized in RBC production. Therefore, the incorporation of iron into protoporphyrin IX to form a new heme moiety closes the circle of heme iron recycling.
      
    
    
      Local circuits
      
        Liver—the iron regulatory organ
        The liver acts as central orchestrator of iron metabolism through various mechanisms. First, among many other carrier proteins, hepatocytes synthesize TF to cargo ferric iron in the circulation and keep free ionic iron at minimal levels. Second, even small fluctuations in plasma iron such as those originating from a single dose of an iron supplement are sensed by the liver and counterbalanced by an accordant change in hepcidin expression [158]. An increase in plasma iron stimulates hepcidin secretion which dampens macrophage iron egress and to a lesser extent duodenal iron absorption following its interaction with Fpn1. Conversely, KC appear to dampen hepatocytes’ hepcidin expression since KC depletion with clodronate liposomes augments hepcidin and leads to a dramatic drop in plasma iron levels according to one study [228]. However, other data suggest that KC are dispensable for the induction of hepcidin in response to iron or inflammation. Studies in Il-6
−/− mice confirmed that IL-6 is an important mediator to induce hepcidin in response to TLR4 ligation but KC depletion did not alter hepcidin induction in this model [137]. While the physiological role of these observations therefore remains controversial [137, 157], it is tempting to speculate that KC may fine-tune hepcidin production or that a liver-intrinsic circuit reports on the amount of iron acquired by KC through erythrophagocytosis. A diphtheria toxin-mediated depletion of C-type lectin domain family 4 member F (Clec4F), a marker specific to KC, might help to test this hypothesis [207].
        Hepatocytes are also central effectors of the acute phase reaction that is induced during extracellular hemolysis and thereby produce haptoglobin and HPX which are rapidly consumed. Haptoglobin and HPX scavenge free Hb and heme, respectively, and are ligands to CD163 and CD91 which are primarily present on macrophages including KC [100, 120]. The destruction of large amounts of RBC in the circulation further activates F4/80+ CD11blow KC to respond with erythrophagocytosis. KCs have a limited tolerance to iron toxicity and die in the setting of massive hemolysis as discussed above [231].
        Erythrophagocytosis augments Fpn1 and FT expression by F4/80+ CD11b+ liver-infiltrating monocytes that differentiate to macrophages which transiently replace dying KC. In the liver, M-CSF stimulates Fpn1 expression while GM-CSF, which is produced in the spleen, represses Fpn1 [231]. Upon differentiation, these F4/80+ CD11b+ Fpn1+ monocytes also express SpiC and bone morphogenetic protein 6 (Bmp6). While SpiC may program them to recycle iron efficiently, the iron-inducible factor, Bmp6, may have paracrine effects on adjacent hepatocytes by instructing them to increase hepcidin expression, thereby lowering circulating iron levels. However, the major production of Bmp6 in the liver is by yet another liver-resident cell type, sinusoidal endothelial cells [28]. Since Bmp6 stimulates both hepcidin production by hepatocytes [6] and transcriptionally regulates macrophage effector functions [123], it may broadly orchestrate the interplay between various liver-resident cell types. Intriguingly, there might be direct transfer of iron from macrophages to hepatocytes after erythrophagocytosis because iron contained in damaged RBC first accumulates in myeloid cells but is distributed to hepatocytes within 1 week. The underlying mechanism remains elusive but may employ Fpn1 as well as alternative routes of iron trafficking via FT secretion and uptake via FT receptors [34, 90, 130]. In fact, it has been shown that macrophages are the major source of plasma FT [40].
        The importance of Fpn1 for liver cell functions is evident from the clinical manifestations of ferroportin disease (type 4 hemochromatosis) which is caused by various mutations in the SLC40A1 (encoding FPN1) gene [148, 189]. Classical loss-of-function mutations of SLC40A1 result in reduced iron transport capacity that are attributable to an amino acid exchange in the iron pore or to protein misfolding of FPN1. The mutations mainly manifest in the MPS (i.e., by iron retention in KC) because the high iron turnover of macrophages cannot be met by 50% of functional FPN1 molecules transcribed from the intact SLC40A1 allele [58, 149]. However, non-classical Fpn1 mutations SLC40A1 are gain-of-function mutations that cause hepcidin resistance of the FPN1 protein. In this case, hepcidin cannot bind to FPN1 and does not cause its internalization and lysosomal degradation. Consequently, a phenotype of functional hepcidin deficiency that is similar to classical type I hemochromatosis with hepatocellular iron overload occurs [2, 188, 246]. In summary, hepatocytes, KC, and endothelial cells cooperate to maintain the body’s iron homeostasis and we are beginning to decipher the signals that coordinate the function of these and other liver-resident cell types.
      
      
        Spleen—iron recycler in steady state
        Similar to the liver, several cell populations co-exist in the spleen. RPM ingest erythrocytes in steady state, eliminating more than 2 × 106 of these cells per second in a healthy adult (as deduced from the RBC production rate assuming equilibrium). This enormous task has implications for the spleen’s immune function. For instance, CD47 is a “do not eat me” signal expressed by many cell types including RBC [178]. CD47 is recognized by signal regulatory protein alpha (SIRPα) on macrophages which then ignore the intact RBC. In contrast, CD47-deficient RBC are rapidly cleared from the circulation. Aging RBC partially lose surface expression of CD47 [109]. Given that CD47 specifically and substantially inhibits FcγR-mediated phagocytosis of IgG-carrying RBC, the CD47 reduction with senescence is thought to enable the elimination of aged RBC. RPM are not the only ones that recognize CD47, though. The absence of CD47 on RBC is also sensed by splenic CD4+ DCs. Lacking the inhibitory input of CD47-SIRPα interaction, they are licensed to augment MHC-II, CD86, and CCR7 and start their migration to the T cell zone to stimulate T cells [253]. However, it remains unclear whether or not erythrophagocytosis by RPM and CD4+ DC activation affect each other.
        In response to increased demand for erythrophagocytosis, the spleen also produces abundant amount of GM-CSF, which inhibits Fpn1 expression in macrophages [231]. It has thus been proposed that the emergency mechanism of iron recycling is less efficient under stress conditions in the spleen. This fundamental difference between spleen and liver may be based on the fact that iron alters the binding affinity of antibodies: Both ferrous iron and free heme interact with IgG to enlarge the antibody repertoire. Specifically, heme-IgG complexes have a broader ability to recognize bacterial antigens and kill intact bacteria. In addition, Fe-IgG complexes protect from E. coli sepsis suggesting another possible link between erythrophagocytosis and adaptive immunity [52, 53]. Another aspect underlying reduced erythrophagocytosis in the spleen under stress conditions including infections can be attributed to the fact that iron loading of macrophages dampens their innate anti-microbial effector function directed against invading pathogens [212]. While the function of RPM in continuous erythrophagocytosis is clear, we are lacking a comprehensive understanding of how iron recycling in the splenic red pulp and the organ’s immune functions affect each other.
      
      
        Muscle—venue for a closed circuit for iron recycling following myolysis?
        A mechanism comparable to hemolysis-induced RBC recycling in the liver has recently been described in the skeletal muscle in the context of rhabdomyolysis. Rhabdomyolysis, the death of the skeletal muscle, poses a fundamental risk for the body’s integrity because myoglobin, the oxygen transfer protein, is a heme-containing protein that can contribute to iron-mediated radical damage. Additionally, myoglobin’s molecular weight of 17 kDa allows it to penetrate the glomerular filtration apparatus of the kidney which operates at a cutoff of 30–50 kDa so that in rhabdomyolysis large quantities of myoglobin end up in the renal tubuli where they can cause acute kidney injury (crush kidney). Therefore, the skeletal muscle is equipped with a machinery that protects from free myoglobin/heme-mediated damage. This includes HPX formation and myeloid cell recruitment. Macrophages infiltrating the injured skeletal muscle induce the expression of Hmox1, CD163, and FT to contain and detoxify heme [41]. It has further been suggested that the induction of Hmox1 and Fpn1 by the infiltrating monocytes allows for local heme iron recycling so that the regenerating myoblasts have enough iron for de novo myoglobin synthesis. It will be interesting to see whether myeloid cells also affect iron metabolism of skeletal muscle during more physiological conditions such as growth and whether there are perturbations in myopathies other than rhabdomyolysis.
      
      
        Heart—an organ exquisitely sensitive to iron toxicity
        The presence of a local mechanism of iron recycling by monocytes in skeletal muscle raises the question whether similar circuits exist throughout the body. Given that myocardial ischemia induces substantial recruitment of monocytes from blood, BM, and spleen to the site of damage and its vicinity, these cells may also encounter myoglobin molecules. However, the adult myocardium lacks regenerative potential suggesting that iron handling by monocytes infiltrating the injured heart muscle may be different from that of monocytes infiltrating damaged skeletal muscle [92]. Alternatively, it is possible that cardiac fibroblasts use iron recycled by monocytes for proliferation and collagen synthesis [80].
        Resident cardiac macrophages are one of the major non-parenchymal cells of the heart [223]. They have well-established roles in the pathogenesis of ischemic myocardial injury as well as in tissue repair thereafter [93, 96]. In addition, their roles in the metabolic activity of the adjacent myocardium and in chronic cardiac diseases such as congestive heart failure are increasingly appreciated [199], and macrophages may either tailor the delivery of iron to the myocardium or accumulate and detoxify heme which may mainly arise from tissue injury [161, 214].
        The susceptibility of the heart to pathological iron loading is well reflected in Friedreich’s ataxia, an autosomal recessive disease with a complex neurological phenotype that inevitably affects the heart; congestive heart failure is the most frequent cause of death in these patients. Frataxin localizes to mitochondria where it fulfills functions in the assembly of iron-sulfur clusters acting as the mitochondrial iron chaperone [24].
        Given the extraordinary energy generation by mitochondria in cardiomyocytes, it is likely that the cardiac phenotype of Friedreich’s ataxia is primarily a parenchymal one that occurs as a consequence of mitochondrial heme accumulation due to defective iron utilization [98]. However, it is interesting to note that the number of CD68+ macrophages is increased in the myocardium of Friedreich ataxia patients and that these cells contain higher amounts of FT. It has been proposed that Fpn1-mediated iron export from cardiac macrophages may be impaired in Friedreich’s disease [115].
        Since cardiomyocytes are exquisitely sensitive to iron overload and iron overload disorders commonly affect the heart, a better understanding of iron handling by resident or recruited myeloid cells in the cardiac microenvironment may open new therapeutic options. However, cardiac macrophages are already an established diagnostic target of contrast material in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Specifically, nanoscale iron-containing compounds (IONs, for iron oxide nanoparticles) have been designed to being selectively taken up by macrophages [183]. After exposure to magnetic fields, these compounds cause a signal alteration which is affected by processes such as ischemia or inflammation secondary to macrophage activation.
      
      
        Blood vessels—arterial macrophage iron overload as hallmark of atherosclerosis
        Iron accumulation in arterial macrophages has long been suggested to contribute to the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis [220]. A comprehensive pathophysiological understanding of this observation is still pending. However, it is well documented that arterial macrophages, typically identified by CD68 histochemistry on histologic sections within atherosclerotic lesions, contain larger amounts of FT than those outside plaques [129, 256]. Accordingly, high levels of plasma FT are an independent risk factor for the severity of carotid artery disease [110, 111], and high circulating iron levels have been linked to impaired endothelial function and intima media thickening, two early predictors of atherosclerosis [76]. Published evidence suggests that microhemorrhages occur in the vasa vasora of the arterial wall and that macrophages remove RBC debris by phagocytosis, which increases their iron levels without overt activation [22, 87, 201]. In addition, atherosclerosis is a lipid-driven chronic inflammatory disorder closely linked to the metabolic syndrome, and higher plasma hepcidin levels are associated with vascular damage as documented in a small but well-conducted ultrasonographic pilot study [238]. That said, hepcidin levels do not predict an increased risk for myocardial infarction or stroke in a population-based study [182].
        The specific role of macrophage iron efflux in the progression of atherosclerosis is controversial. While the presence of the hypofunctional flatiron mutation of Slc40a1 in apolipoprotein E-deficient (Apoe
−/−) mice did not affect atherosclerosis [107], systemic administration of the hepcidin-antagonist LDN-193189 (LDN), which inhibits Bmp-induced hepcidin transcription [10, 27, 230], blocked the differentiation of macrophages into foam cells. This latter effect was based on enhanced expression of ATB-binding cassette transporters ABCA1 and ABCG1, two major cholesterol efflux proteins, and on increased cholesterol transfer to apolipoprotein A1 (ApoA1) [198]. Importantly, LDN treatment also reduced atherosclerotic lesion size, suggesting that modulating systemic iron metabolism affects atherosclerosis progression. A more selective approach that only targets arterial wall macrophages may be warranted as the metabolic syndrome can be associated not only with functional iron deficiency (predicted to be ameliorated by hepcidin antagonism) but also with iron overload (predicted to be aggravated by systemic hepcidin inhibition).
        The dysregulation of iron metabolism in arterial macrophages is not limited to the hepcidin-Fpn1 axis. In humans, expression of the ferroxidases hephaestin and ceruloplasmin was reduced in atherosclerosis [105]. Accordingly, there is in vitro evidence that iron-induced ROS contribute to LDL oxidation and that oxidized LDL particles induce FTH and hepcidin transcription in macrophages which may reduce Fpn1 levels and thus retain cellular iron [144].
        In conclusion, evidence is accumulating for a cross-talk between the regulators of iron and cholesterol metabolism both systemically and locally in the microenvironment of the atherosclerotic plaque. However, due to a lack of mechanistic insight, we are not able yet to therapeutically target one metabolite or metabolic pathway in the attempt to beneficially affect the other.
      
      
        Brain—cerebral iron overload is implicated in neurodegeneration
        In the central nervous system (CNS), macrophages appear as microglia and are in close proximity to neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes. The microglia depend on the transcription factors PU.1 (encoded by SPI1) and “Spalt-like”-1 (Sall1) [25] and are important for maintaining CNS homeostasis in physiological conditions and for restoring it after injury [84]. This paradigm has also been addressed in the context of iron metabolism. For instance, after experimental intracranial hemorrhage (ICH), microglia clear RBC but may also sustain inflammation and cause secondary damage. It is thus conceivable that the molecular machinery for RBC degradation and heme iron recycling including Hmox1 and Nramp1 [213] is essential for microglial function [19]. Indeed, long-term induction of Hmox1 promotes the resolution of ICH [260]. However, this may not be a feasible therapeutic approach to be readily translated into clinical practice because various cerebral cell types differ in their cytoprotective enzyme repertoire and thus in their sensitivity to iron-induced damage [255]. Cell type-specific overexpression of Hmox1 in astrocytes, although neuroprotective in some in vitro models [240] and in ICH in young mice, is deleterious in other settings [133, 215, 216] and results in spontaneous cerebral iron deposition and consecutive movement and psychiatric abnormalities with aging [36, 218]. When the iron chelator deferoxamine (DFO), however, is administered early after experimental ICH, microglial activation is blunted and reduced local concentrations of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukin (IL)-1ß are associated with protection from neuronal death. Therefore, early DFO treatment in experimental ICH translates into improved neurologic outcome [222].
        Local iron accumulation in the brain (particularly in neurons and astrocytes) is linked to several neurodegenerative disorders, collectively referred to as neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) [127]. Although iron-mediated generation of ROS and injury to mitochondria are likely mechanisms [196, 204], the interplay between microglia, neurons, and other cell types in cerebral iron homeostasis is incompletely characterized. A paradigmatic yet rare NBIA condition is the neuroferritinopathy that is caused by a mutation in the coding region of the FTL gene [44, 45]. Although FTH carries the ferroxidase activity that is required to oxidize ferrous iron and to contain it within the FT shell, FTL facilitates the mineralization of ferric iron thus supporting FTH activity. The composition of FT is cell type-specific, and central neuronal FT are L chain-rich [236]. In addition, mutated FTL proteins may have a dominant negative effect on FT’s stability and resistance to oxidative damage [12, 140, 160]. It would appear that neuronal iron efflux is insufficient to remove surplus and potentially harmful iron from the cytoplasm. Whether or not a transfer of iron between neurons and microglial cells exists is unclear. However, it has been proposed that the siderophore-binding peptide lipocalin-2 (NGAL, Lcn2) is secreted by activated microglia and other cell types including neurons to transfer iron across cellular membranes. Notably, Lcn2 also affects a variety of brain functions from cognition to emotional stress [104]. Interestingly, the hyperferritinemia-cataract syndrome that is caused by a mutation in a specific non-coding region of the FTL gene, the iron-responsive element (IRE), is not associated with iron accumulation in the brain but with the formation of ferritin crystals in the ocular lenses, resulting in cataracts in early adulthood [23, 83, 195].
        Several common neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases are also characterized by iron deposition, but they are not considered as classical NBIA. Whether or not the latter is causatively involved in the pathophysiology of the disease or a consequence of neurodegeneration is currently not known, as the influx of iron-rich inflammatory cells and their subsequent death may contribute to neuronal iron overload [233]. In addition, an intrinsic defect of neurons in cellular iron handling may exist. For instance, in neuronal cells exposed to amyloid beta peptide fragments, iron chelation with DFO or deferiprone (DFP) reduces ROS generation via the NADPH oxidase [181]. Apart from neurons, activated microglia can accumulate iron in Alzheimer’s disease, e.g., in the hippocampus as detected my ultra-high-resolution MR [258]. A similar observation has been made in the setting of the HFE H63D polymorphism, which is otherwise associated with type I hereditary hemochromatosis and has been linked to neurodegeneration. Mice with the homologous mutation in Hfe have increased FTL chain expression in microglia, suggesting iron overload [169]. This phenotype is discrepant from the iron-poor one of other Hfe-deficient macrophage populations, but the underlying mechanism remains unknown.
        Similar to cardiac imaging, IONs are selectively taken up by microglia as a function of its activation state. Conceivably, microglial activation due to ischemia or inflammation results in MR signal alterations that can be used for diagnostics. However, microglia are also exquisitely sensitive to the potential toxicity of IONs because they are rapidly degraded within lysosomes and their iron catalyzes ROS generation [184]. Although hepcidin production has been observed in the brain, co-culture models suggest that microglia enhance hepcidin expression by neurons via IL-6 in a paracrine fashion [191]. These findings thus contrast to what has been shown for co-cultured primary Kupffer cells and hepatocytes inasmuch as culture supernatants from primary Kupffer cells blunted hepcidin production [228].
        The published studies provide growing insight into how microglia affect brain function, local iron homeostasis, and iron-mediated neurodegeneration. The human brain is probably the most complex system known, and we need to better understand how its different cell types interact both under physiological conditions and challenges such as cognition or memory, how iron affects the function of the various cerebral cell types, and how we can potentially interfere to prevent iron from contributing to CNS disease.
      
      
        Retina—the location in which iron aggravates light damage
        From an evolutionary standpoint, the retina is part of the CNS. It is thus not surprising that it handles iron similarly to the cerebrum. Since photoreceptors are sensitive to iron toxicity, local iron regulatory circuits including the hepcidin-Fpn1 axis operate in the retina [261]. Müller glial cells and endothelial cells of the retina both express Fpn1, but only the latter cell type is sensitive to hepcidin regulation. This suggests that endothelial Fpn1 is the gatekeeper for iron transport into the retina [232]. In addition, experimental light damage to the retina results in microglial activation, its migration to the outer retina, and in induction of FT H and L chains. These effects along with oxidative stress to photoreceptors can be prevented by the oral iron chelator DFP [217]. Therefore, the retina is another organ that is sensitive to iron toxicity but has evidence of endogenous mechanisms to maintain local iron homeostasis in the microenvironment.
      
      
        Bone—osteoclasts are iron-dependent
        Osteoclasts are bone-resident cells of the MPS whose primary function is to absorb bone tissue in order to maintain, repair, and remodel the skeleton. Osteoclast generation requires the fusion of macrophages, the presence of the cytokines RANKL and M-CSF, and iron. Osteoclast precursors take up iron via Tfr1 and utilize six-transmembrane epithelial antigen of prostate (Steap4) as ferrireductase [262]. In addition, the transcription factor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator 1 beta (PGC-1ß) is essential for osteoclast differentiation [101]. Apparently, both Tfr1-mediated iron uptake and PGC-1ß activation ensure mitochondrial respiration in osteoclasts as prerequisite for energy generation and proton secretion. While PGC-1ß transactivates genes of the mitochondrial respiratory chain, iron acquired via Tfr1 is incorporated into heme moieties and iron-sulfur clusters in mitochondria ensuring activity of their enzyme repertoire. Conceivably, iron overload is often associated with skeletal disease. For instance, surplus iron in thalassemic patients may promote osteoclast differentiation and function and thus contribute to bone resorption [101].
        Arthropathy of the second and third metacarpophalangeal joints is a typical manifestation of type I hemochromatosis [94]. Elevated vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM1) levels are an accurate biomarker to diagnose this condition, but whether the adhesion molecule is also involved in its pathogenesis remains unclear [170]. Of interest, circulating VCAM1 is shed by the metalloproteinase ADAM metallopeptidase domain 17 (ADAM17, AKA TNF alpha-converting enzyme (TACE)) which is activated by inflammatory stimuli [81]. In addition, membrane VCAM1 is expressed on CD169+ macrophages in the spleen and provides a molecular anchor to retain hematopoietic stem cells in the murine spleen, although it is unclear whether this is also relevant to arthropathy [61]. Taken together, despite the essential role of iron for osteoclast development and the clear association of skeletal disease and iron overload, we have little information about underlying mechanisms.
      
      
        Bone marrow—are erythroblasts “nursed” with iron?
        Embedded in cavities and the spongiosa of bones lies the BM as organ of hematopoiesis. Erythroid island macrophages (EIM) are a population of BM-resident macrophages that support erythropoiesis as “nurse cells” [17, 192]. The smallest erythropoietic unit thus consists of a central EIM surrounded by several erythroblasts (and stromal cells). This microarchitecture is maintained by adhesive interactions because EIM depend on a set of adhesion molecules. For instance, EIM express the αV integrin which binds ICAM4 on erythroid cells, and ICAM4 KO mice have reduced numbers of erythropoietic islands [126]. Similarly, macrophage VCAM1 interacts with the integrin-α4ß1 on erythroblasts. It is well characterized that erythroblasts expel their nuclei during differentiation and that these are taken up by EIM after phosphatidylserine exposure via Tim4 and MER proto-oncogene, tyrosine kinase (MerTK) [234, 254].
        The transcription factor SpiC and its down-stream effector Hmox1 are both essential for EIM differentiation, since ablation of either gene reduces EIM number [73, 88]. Less clear however remains the role of EIM and Hmox1 in local iron management in the BM and mechanisms by which EIM may assist erythroblasts in iron acquisition. One possibility is that erythroblasts acquire ionic iron via their proximity to Fpn1 on EIM. However, since Fpn1 exports only divalent iron and erythroblasts largely rely on Tfr1 (AKA CD71) to satisfy their iron demand, one can speculate that either abundant amounts of ceruloplasmin and TF (to oxidize divalent iron) are present in erythroid islands or that direct cell-to-cell transfer of iron from EIM to erythroblasts exists. However, the deletion of Fpn1 by Cre recombinase expressed under the lysozyme M promoter results in iron accumulation in macrophages, including BM macrophages, and mild anemia. This suggests that EIM utilize Fpn1 to export iron and thus function as iron-rich nurse cells [259]. Such a mechanism may be particularly relevant in contexts when erythropoiesis is hyperactive yet inefficient and when local hemolysis occurs in the BM (i.e., in thalassemia syndromes). Another hypothesis is that EIM act as “iron buffers” that continuously releases adequate amounts of iron even when plasma iron levels fluctuate. Yet, another idea is that despite their other essential functions EIM contribute little to the iron acquisition by erythroblasts and that the latter import any TF-bound iron the blood stream delivers. Data in support of this concept has been generated using the CD169-DTR model: The depletion of EIM (and other CD169+ macrophages) had only little impact on the restoration of erythropoiesis after BM transplantation. Concretely, a moderate decrease of iron supply to erythroblasts as deduced from the reduced Hb content in reticulocytes was observed [38]. In conclusion, much needs to be learned about local mechanisms and their regulation of iron shuttling from EIM to erythroblasts at various stages of their differentiation.
      
    
    
      The complexity of macrophage iron handling at the cellular level
      Macrophages express a range of factors mediating iron uptake (summarized in the Table 1) which essentially face only two pathways for iron efflux, Fpn1 for ionic iron and feline leukemia virus subtype C receptor (Flvcr) for heme iron (Fig. 2), although alternatives routes may exist [49, 136]. One such mechanism may involve Lcn2 and one of its receptors, LcnR (AKA SLC22A17). Lcn2 binds distinct types of so-called siderophores, low molecular mass compounds with remarkably high affinity and specificity for ferric iron. These are best characterized in bacteria, but eukaryotes including fungi and mammals produce siderophores, too [16, 42, 67, 86, 106]. While some of these compounds such as citrate are ubiquitous substrates, other mammalian siderophores such as catechols are probably synthesized from commensal metabolites or dietary precursors [11, 50, 252]. Much needs to be learned about the biology of mammalian siderophores whose important functions may extend beyond mitochondrial iron homeostasis, erythropoiesis, and host defense [47, 134, 135].Table 1Selected proteins involved in macrophage iron handlingProteinDesignation(s)Gene nameFunctionTFR1Transferrin receptor-1; CD71
TFRC
Uptake of TF-bound iron; essential for erythroblasts and lymphocytes [128, 141]; genetic defect associated with common immunodeficiency (IMD-46) [103]HFEHFE; HLA-H
HFE
Associates with TFR1; the C282Y HFE mutation causes hemochromatosis (type 1) characterized by macrophage iron depletion [18]; affects outcome of infections [13]DMT1Divalent metal transporter-1; Solute Carrier Family 11 member A2
SLC11A2
Uptake of ferrous iron through the cell surface membrane and from TFR1 endosomes; genetic defect associated with iron deficiency anemia and hepatocellular iron accumulation [68, 69, 99]DCYTBDuodenal cytochrome b; Cytochrome b reductase 1
CYBRD1
Reduction of ferric iron to its ferrous form prior to uptake via DMT1 [152, 159]; induced in iron deficiency [264]STEAPsSix-transmembrane epithelial antigen of prostate
e.g. STEAP4
Reduction of ferric iron prior to uptake via TFR1, e.g. STEAP4 in osteoclast precursors [95, 124, 177, 262]LCNRLipocalin-2 receptor; 24P3R
SLC22A17
Bi-directional iron transport across the cell membrane requiring LCN2 and a catecholate-type siderophore [49, 210]LCN2Lipocalin-2; Neutrophil gelatinase associated lipocalin
LCN2
Binds iron-laden siderophores of different classes [11, 70]; acts as chemotaxin [206]; associated with cancer metastasisNRAMP1Natural resistance-associated macrophage protein-1
SLC11A1
Iron (and other divalent metal ion) export out of the phagolysosome for iron withholding from pathogens [14, 20, 163]; also affects odds of developing autoimmune diseasesIRP1Iron regulatory protein-1; Aconitase 1
ACO1
Interaction with IREs, stabilize TFR1 and DMT1 mRNAs; blocks translation of FPN1 and FT mRNAs; its iron-sulfur cluster disassembles upon cellular iron starvation [242]IRP2Iron regulatory protein-2
IREB2
Similar to IRP1; becomes deactivated via the ubiquitin proteasome pathway when surplus iron is sensed in the cytosol [77, 243]FTHFerritin heavy chain
FTH
Iron storage; sole carrier of the ferroxidase activity of cytosolic FT [197]; anti-apoptotic [186, 236]FTLFerritin light chain
FTL
Iron storage; genetic defect causes neuroferritinopathy (coding region) or hyperferritinemia cataract syndrome (non-coding IRE) [3, 15, 26]FPN1Ferroportin-1
SLC40A1
Ionic iron exporter [1, 56, 150, 151, 263]; receptor for hepcidin [173]HepcidinHepcidin antimicrobial peptide
HAMP
Binds to FPN1 to label it for internalization and degradation; induced by IL-6, IL-22 and Bmp6 [6, 7, 172]; genetic defect results in juvenile hemochromatosis (type 2B) [174, 194]HEPHHephaestin
HEPH
Oxidizes ferrous iron for loading onto TF [4, 33]HRG1Heme-regulated gene-1
HRG1
Shifts heme from the lysosome to the cytosol [35, 250]FLVCRFeline leukemia virus subgroup C receptor
FLVCR1
Exports heme across the cell membrane; genetic deletion results in RPM iron overload [108]
Fig. 2
a In homeostatic conditions, iron uptake and release pathways are coordinated ensuring efficient iron recycling from aged red blood cells (aRBC) and iron delivery to sites of erythropoiesis. Apart from erythrophagocytosis, iron uptake mechanisms include (left to right) ferritin (FT) receptors such as scavenger receptor class A member (Scara)-5 and T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain-containing molecule (Tim)-2, transferrin (TF; depicted as monomer for simplicity) and its receptor Tfr1, the ferric reductase duodenal cytochrome B (DcytB) and divalent metal transporter (Dmt)-1, lactoferrin (LF) and its receptor LfR, lipocalin (Lcn)-2 and its receptor LcnR, haptoglobin-hemoglobin (Hb) complexes and their receptor CD163, and hemopexin (HPX)-heme complexes and their receptor CD91. Endosomal iron transporters Dmt1, natural resistance-associated macrophage protein-1 (Nramp1), and heme-regulated gene-1 (HRG1) shift ferrous iron or heme to the cytoplasm, from where the former can be exported via ferroportin (Fpn)-1 and the latter metabolized by heme oxygenase (Hmox)-1 or exported via feline leukemia virus subgroup C receptor (Flvcr). Macrophage iron homeostasis ensures proper function including the activity of pivotal transcription factors nuclear factor (NF)-IL6, NF-κB, and hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1α, all of which are iron regulated. b Macrophage iron overload may result from an increase in circulating or local hepcidin concentrations, an elevated TF saturation, free iron excess, or hemolysis with subsequent accumulation of damaged RBC (dRBC), free Hb, or free heme. If severe, all these mechanisms will overwhelm the macrophage’s capacity to contain, store, and detoxify iron resulting in an increase of free iron, heme, and/or FT in cells. On the one hand, surplus intracellular iron may serve as nutrient for intraphagosomal or cytoplasmatic pathogens (e.g. for Gram-negative rods in the Tfr1-endosome and the cytoplasm). On the other hand, iron overload differentially affects distinct innate immune pathways. Surplus iron blocks the binding of transcription factors NF-IL6 and HIF-1α to their respective target promoter sequences. In parallel, iron facilitates the generation of ROS and thus NF-κB activation. Therefore, iron overload may cause a dysbalance in the transcriptional response to macrophage activation

      As discussed above, scavenger receptors for the uptake of senescent or damaged RBC and for the clearance of complexed and free forms of Hb and heme are expressed at high levels in liver and spleen yet may be induced at other locations in response to inflammatory stimuli. These scavenger receptors are coupled to a down-stream machinery of heme detoxification. Its two major functional components are HRG1 which shifts heme from the endosome/lysosome to the cytoplasm and Hmox1 which then metabolizes heme [117]. In addition to the phagocyte-specific scavenger receptors, Tfr1 and divalent metal transporter 1 (Dmt1), two ubiquitous iron import proteins, are also expressed by macrophages.
      
        A broad spectrum of iron uptake pathways
        Macrophages express a range of factors mediating iron uptake, although the relative importance of these factors to different macrophage populations has not been systematically studied. It is well established that RPM and KC express the complete machinery for RBC clearance and heme iron recycling [72, 88, 231]. At either of these locations (spleen and liver), CD163 and CD91, two members of the scavenger receptor family, are expressed at high levels. Whereas CD163 binds both free and haptoglobin-bound Hb, CD91 accepts heme-HPX complexes. However, many other molecules participate in the overall process. Among these, heme-regulated gene 1 (HRG1) shifts heme from the endosome/lysosome to the cytoplasm, which is then metabolized by Hmox1 [117]. At the cell surface membrane, macrophages possess the heme exporter Flvcr and its genetic deletion results in RPM iron overload [108]. Tfr1, which is also known as CD71, is widely expressed by isolated macrophages, and it may form a major route of iron uptake in the absence of RBC (an indirect iron source), though it also appears to be important in adaptive immunity [103, 138]. Dmt1 shifts iron from the extracellular space to the cytoplasm and, in its alternately spliced form, from the Tfr1 endosome to the cytoplasm [69, 99, 139]. At either location, Dmt1 only accepts ferrous iron along with other divalent cations, such as copper or manganese, and co-localizes with an iron reductase [152, 177].
      
      
        The control of cytosolic iron levels
        FT is the central mechanism of iron storage in macrophages and other cell types (25, 179, (236). However, LysM-Cre FTH mice have no apparent phenotype suggesting that iron storage and trafficking are well controlled in myeloid cells by other mechanisms [46, 239]. One such mechanism to maintain cytosolic iron levels are the iron regulatory proteins (IRPs) 1 and 2 [5, 179, 195]. IRPs sense free labile iron and control cellular iron homeostasis at the post-transcriptional level: Due to their ability to interact with iron-responsive elements (IREs) that are present in the non-coding mRNA sequences of Tfr1, Dmt1, Fpn1, FTH, and FTL chains, fluctuations in intracellular iron are promptly counterbalanced [179, 195]. Interestingly, the functions of IRPs1 and 2 are redundant in macrophages and only targeted deletion of both isoforms via the LysM-Cre system results in increased FT levels and intracellular iron retention [193]. The deletion of both IRPs in macrophages does not affect RBC recycling but impairs their nutritional immune functions against intracellular bacteria, such as Salmonella Typhimurium [166]. This pathogen preferentially infects murine macrophages and has a proliferative advantage in the absence of both IRPs resulting in increased bacterial burden and reduced survival in a systemic infection model. Therefore, macrophage IRPs are required to regulate their effector functions upon infection with an iron-dependent pathogen.
      
      
        Interplay of macrophage iron metabolism and immune functions
        Macrophage iron metabolism and immune functions are interconnected [57, 79, 165, 247]. Clinical data as well as many studies in infection models show that macrophage iron overload, often resulting from hemolysis or iron supplementation, interferes with their antimicrobial activity (Fig. 2b). Several mechanisms explain this negative effect that surplus iron has on macrophage effector functions and the outcome of infectious diseases. First, a range of intracellular microbes can resist killing by macrophages by gaining access to macrophage iron pools [30, 245]. Second, iron alters gene transcription, translation, and mitochondrial respiration in macrophages [165, 175]. Specifically, macrophage functions driven by IFN-γ are impaired when macrophages are exposed to surplus iron [138, 162, 176] largely because iron directly inhibits the binding activities of the transcription factors nuclear factor interleukin-6 (NF-IL6) and hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1α [55, 153] [176]. Because of its inhibitory effects on NF-IL6 and HIF-1α, iron excess blocks Nos2 transcription and the high output formation of NO which worsens bacterial killing of iron-laden macrophages [91, 164]. In addition, IFN-γ in conjunction with TLR4 ligation results in NF-κB-dependent activation of HIF-1α and increased transcription of TfR1 thus aggravating macrophage iron overload [224]. Moreover, hypoxia impairs NO production by Nos2 and thus blunts the antimicrobial activity of macrophages towards Leishmania major [142]. Another layer of complexity is added by the fact that TLR4 signaling stabilizes HIF-1α activation via induction of FTH and hypoxia stimulates arginase-1 expression in myeloid cells thus undermining Leishmania killing [142, 209]. Mechanistically, these two modes of HIF activation are distinct. While TLR4 signaling results in depletion of iron as co-substrate which prolyl hydroxylases (PHDs) require to tag HIF for degradation, hypoxia, per definition, impairs PHD activity due to a lack of their substrate oxygen. Nevertheless, both hypoxia (secondary to anemia or impaired microcirculation) and the presence of TLR ligands may be present at sites of infection in close spatial or temporal association. In addition, monocytes may be exposed to fluctuating levels of both stimuli (hypoxia and inflammation) as they travel to sites of injury and infiltrate the tissue to differentiate and become sessile. Therefore, due to its sensitivity to both oxygen and iron, the transcription factor HIF-1α appears to hold a central position in the interplay of macrophage iron homeostasis and immunity.
        In contrast to its inhibitory effect on NO, iron stimulates the non-enzymatic generation of ROS which may promote their antimicrobial activity but contribute to tissue damage and the pathogenesis of many inflammatory disorders. In this context, iron present in heme can stimulate the production of ROS and of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF, IL-1ß, and IL-6 [241]. In contrast, arginase-1, which depletes the Nos2 substrate arginine by converting it to ornithine [62, 205], is reduced by heme. These effects may contribute to the inflammatory characteristics of sickle cell disease and can be ameliorated by the heme scavenger HPX. Accordingly, free heme, which is predicted to accumulate when Hmox1 is inhibited, activates NF-κB to induce TNF and Nos2 transcription resulting in improved control of Salmonella infection [154]. Intriguingly, the accumulation of heme during the course of sepsis-induced hemolysis also impairs phagocyte functions due to interference with actin cytoskeleton rearrangements resulting in poor outcome [146].
        A phagolysosomal transporter with homology to Dmt1 (Nramp2) is Nramp1 [8, 20, 71, 75]. Its cation transport function is directly linked to the antimicrobial activity of macrophages and DCs [74, 163, 219]. In addition, the functional form of Nramp1 in myeloid cells shifts the balance in T helper cell activity towards Th1, which may increase resistance to infections while increasing the susceptibility to autoimmune diseases [167, 226]. However, the directionality of iron transport is still under some debate [32, 71, 225, 249]: Most studies have shown that Nramp1 shifts iron and other divalent cations from the phagolysosome to the cytosol. This pathway is important for iron recycling after erythrophagocytosis [213] and serves as a mechanism of nutrient withdrawal that is particularly efficient in host defense against Mycobacterium, Salmonella, and Leishmania species [31]. However, some data suggest that Nramp1 in fact pumps iron into the phagolysosome where it may boost ROS generation [121, 122].
        As discussed earlier, nanoparticles are increasingly used in clinical routine for imaging studies. Although intended to be otherwise inert, it has recently been uncovered in tumor models that nanoparticles may alter the biology of both tumor cells and tumor-associated macrophages, albeit with favorable results. Two elegant studies have shown that the application of nanoparticles to tumor-bearing mice is sufficient to induce clinical remission. One of these papers implicated a direct tumoricidal effect of iron delivered by ultrasmall polyethylene glycol particles and attributed tumor regression to the induction of ferroptosis in malignant cells [112]. The other study suggested that IONs stimulate TNF expression while inhibiting arginase-1 which results in improved killing of tumor cells [257]. These novel and exciting data support the general idea that the modulation of macrophage iron homeostasis is a promising way to control their immune functions and alter myeloid-driven disease processes in infection, auto-immunity, atherosclerosis, and possibly also cancer [143, 167]
      
    
    
      Conclusion
      The MPS comprises a heterogeneous population of tissue-specific leukocytes. It is a cornerstone of innate immunity, regulates the adaptive immune system, and is indispensable for tissue development, homeostasis, and repair. One of macrophages’ central metabolic functions is to eliminate senescent and damaged RBCs and to recycle their heme-bound iron to maintain systemic and cellular iron homeostasis. The role of macrophages in iron handling preserves iron homeostasis and tissue integrity. Under physiologic conditions, macrophages recycle the iron for erythropoiesis, while under hemolytic stress, macrophages detoxify heme to prevent iron toxicity towards parenchymal cells and tissues.
      Only recently, we have begun to appreciate the specific functions of various macrophage populations in the body and to study their potential roles iron metabolism. New technologies are entering the field including systems biology approaches, in situ LASER capture, single cell RNA sequencing, cell type-specific genomic editing with CRISPR/Cas9, and cell type-specific vectors to silence genes of interest [43]. Such methods will be important to critically interrogate results obtained by more drastic and unspecific approaches (such as global macrophage depletion or MAC sorting) and to understand the spatiotemporal orchestration of iron metabolism at the single cell level and in the context of the tissue microenvironment characterized by cell-to-cell contact and paracrine signals. Most of all, we face the challenge to translate findings obtained in small animal models to human subjects to improve patient care.
    
  

    
      Abbreviations
      
        
          ABCA1, ABCG1
          
            ATP binding cassette transporter A1 or G1, respectively
          
        
        
          ADAM17
          
            ADAM metallopeptidase domain 17
          
        
        
          ApoA1, ApoE
          
            Apolipoprotein A1 or E, respectively
          
        
        
          ARE
          
            Antioxidant response elements
          
        
        
          Bach1
          
            Btb And and Cnc Homology homology 1
          
        
        
          BM
          
            Bone marrow
          
        
        
          Bmp6
          
            Bone morphogenetic protein 6
          
        
        
          CCL
          
            CC-chemokine ligand
          
        
        
          CCR
          
            CC-chemokine receptor
          
        
        
          CD
          
            Cluster of differentiation
          
        
        
          Clec4F
          
            C-type Type lectin domain family 4 member F
          
        
        
          Cas9
          
            CRISPR- associated protein 9
          
        
        
          CNS
          
            Central nervous system
          
        
        
          CRISPR
          
            Clustered regulatory interspaced short palindromic repeats
          
        
        
          DC
          
            Dendritic cell
          
        
        
          DcytB
          
            Duodenal cytochrome B
          
        
        
          DFO
          
            Deferoxamine
          
        
        
          Dmt1
          
            Divalent metal transporter 1
          
        
        
          DFP
          
            Deferiprone
          
        
        
          EB
          
            Erythroblast
          
        
        
          EIM
          
            Erythroid island macrophages
          
        
        
          FcγR
          
            Fragment, crystallizable, gamma receptor
          
        
        
          Fpn1
          
            Ferroportin 1
          
        
        
          Flvcr
          
            Feline leukemia virus subtype C receptor
          
        
        
          FT
          
            Ferritin
          
        
        
          FTH, FTL
          
            Ferritin heavy chain or light chain, respectively
          
        
        
          F4/80
          
            (Murine macrophage marker) EGF-like module-containing mucin-like hormone receptor-like 1
          
        
        
          GM-CSF
          
            Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
          
        
        
          Hb
          
            Hemoglobin
          
        
        
          HFE
          
            Type I hemochromatosis gene
          
        
        
          HIF
          
            Hypoxia-inducible factor
          
        
        
          Hmox
          
            Heme oxygenase
          
        
        
          HPX
          
            Hemopexin
          
        
        
          HRE
          
            Hypoxia- responsive element
          
        
        
          HRG1
          
            Heme-regulated gene 1
          
        
        
          ICH
          
            Intracranial hemorrhage
          
        
        
          IFN
          
            Interferone
          
        
        
          Ig
          
            Immunoglobulin
          
        
        
          IL
          
            Interleukin
          
        
        
          ION
          
            Iron oxide nanoparticle
          
        
        
          IRE
          
            Iron responsive element
          
        
        
          IRP
          
            Iron regulatory protein
          
        
        
          KC
          
            Kupffer cell
          
        
        
          Lcn2
          
            Lipocalin 2
          
        
        
          LcnR
          
            Lcn2 receptor
          
        
        
          LDN
          
            LDN-193189 a BMP inhibitor that decreases hepcidin expression
          
        
        
          LF
          
            Lactoferrin
          
        
        
          LfR
          
            Lactoferrin receptor
          
        
        
          MAC
          
            Magnetic activated cell (sorting)
          
        
        
          M-CSF
          
            Macrophage colony-stimulating factor
          
        
        
          MerTK
          
            MER proto-oncogene, tyrosine kinase
          
        
        
          MHC-II
          
            Major histocompatibiliy complex class II
          
        
        
          MPS
          
            Mononuclear phagocyte system
          
        
        
          MRI
          
            Magnetic resonance imaging
          
        
        
          NADPH oxidase
          
            Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate-oxidase
          
        
        
          NBIA
          
            Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation
          
        
        
          Nrf2
          
            Nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2
          
        
        
          NF-IL6
          
            Nuclear factor interleukin 6
          
        
        
          NF-κB
          
            Nuclear factor kappa B
          
        
        
          NLPR3
          
            NACHT, LRR, and PYD domains-containing protein 3 AKA cryopyrin
          
        
        
          Nramp1
          
            Natural resistance-associated macrophage protein 1
          
        
        
          PHD
          
            Prolyl hydroxylase domain proteins
          
        
        
          PGC-1ß
          
            Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator 1 beta
          
        
        
          PU.1
          
            An E26 transformation-specific transcription factor encoded by the SPI1 gene
          
        
        
          RBC
          
            Red blood cell
          
        
        
          Rev-ErbAα, Rev-ErbBα
          
            (Nuclear receptors) NR1D1 and NR1D2, for nuclear receptor subfamily 1, group D, member 1 or member 2, respectively
          
        
        
          RPM
          
            Red pulp macrophage
          
        
        
          ROS
          
            Reactive oxygen species
          
        
        
          Sall1
          
            “Spalt-like”-1
          
        
        
          Scara5
          
            Scavenger receptor class A member 5
          
        
        
          SIRPα
          
            Signal regulatory protein alpha
          
        
        
          SpiC
          
            An E26 transformation-specific transcription factor of the Spi subfamily
          
        
        
          SR-A1
          
            Scavenger receptor class A type 1
          
        
        
          Steap
          
            Six-transmembrane epithelial antigen of prostate
          
        
        
          TF
          
            Transferrin
          
        
        
          Tfr1
          
            Transferrin receptor 1
          
        
        
          Tim
          
            T-cell immunoglobulin- and mucin- domain-containing molecule
          
        
        
          TLR4
          
            Toll-like receptor 4
          
        
        
          VCAM1
          
            Vascular cell adhesion molecule 1
          
        
      
    
    
      
        This article is part of the special issue on macrophages in tissue homeostasis in Pflügers Archiv – European Journal of Physiology
      
    
    
      References
      
        1.
        
          
            
              Abboud
              S
            
            
              Haile
              DJ
            
          
          A novel mammalian iron-regulated protein involved in intracellular iron metabolism
          J Biol Chem
          2000
          275
          19906
          19912
          10.1074/jbc.M000713200
          
          10747949
        
      
      
        2.
        
          
            
              Adams
              PC
            
            
              Barton
              JC
            
          
          Haemochromatosis
          Lancet
          2007
          370
          1855
          1860
          10.1016/S0140-6736(07)61782-6
          
          18061062
        
      
      
        3.
        
          
            
              Aguilar-Martinez
              P
            
            
              Biron
              C
            
            
              Masmejean
              C
            
            
              Jeanjean
              P
            
            
              Schved
              JF
            
          
          A novel mutation in the iron responsive element of ferritin L-subunit gene as a cause for hereditary hyperferritinemia-cataract syndrome
          Blood
          1996
          88
          1895
          
          8781450
        
      
      
        4.
        
          
            
              Anderson
              GJ
            
            
              Frazer
              DM
            
            
              McKie
              AT
            
            
              Vulpe
              CD
            
          
          The ceruloplasmin homolog hephaestin and the control of intestinal iron absorption
          Blood Cells Mol Dis
          2002
          29
          367
          375
          10.1006/bcmd.2002.0576
          
          12547227
        
      
      
        5.
        
          
            
              Anderson
              CP
            
            
              Shen
              M
            
            
              Eisenstein
              RS
            
            
              Leibold
              EA
            
          
          Mammalian iron metabolism and its control by iron regulatory proteins
          Biochim Biophys Acta
          2012
          1823
          1468
          1483
          10.1016/j.bbamcr.2012.05.010
          
          22610083
        
      
      
        6.
        
          
            
              Andriopoulos
              B
              Jr
            
            
              Corradini
              E
            
            
              Xia
              Y
            
            
              Faasse
              SA
            
            
              Chen
              S
            
            
              Grgurevic
              L
            
            
              Knutson
              MD
            
            
              Pietrangelo
              A
            
            
              Vukicevic
              S
            
            
              Lin
              HY
            
            
              Babitt
              JL
            
          
          BMP6 is a key endogenous regulator of hepcidin expression and iron metabolism
          Nat Genet
          2009
          41
          482
          487
          10.1038/ng.335
          
          19252486
        
      
      
        7.
        
          
            
              Armitage
              AE
            
            
              Eddowes
              LA
            
            
              Gileadi
              U
            
            
              Cole
              S
            
            
              Spottiswoode
              N
            
            
              Selvakumar
              TA
            
            
              Ho
              LP
            
            
              Townsend
              AR
            
            
              Drakesmith
              H
            
          
          Hepcidin regulation by innate immune and infectious stimuli
          Blood
          2011
          118
          4129
          4139
          10.1182/blood-2011-04-351957
          
          21873546
        
      
      
        8.
        
          
            
              Atkinson
              PG
            
            
              Blackwell
              JM
            
            
              Barton
              CH
            
          
          Nramp1 locus encodes a 65 kDa interferon-gamma-inducible protein in murine macrophages
          Biochem J
          1997
          325
          Pt 3
          779
          786
          10.1042/bj3250779
          
          9271100
        
      
      
        9.
        
          
            
              Auffray
              C
            
            
              Sieweke
              MH
            
            
              Geissmann
              F
            
          
          Blood monocytes: development, heterogeneity, and relationship with dendritic cells
          Annu Rev Immunol
          2009
          27
          669
          692
          10.1146/annurev.immunol.021908.132557
          
          19132917
        
      
      
        10.
        
          
            
              Babitt
              JL
            
            
              Huang
              FW
            
            
              Wrighting
              DM
            
            
              Xia
              Y
            
            
              Sidis
              Y
            
            
              Samad
              TA
            
            
              Campagna
              JA
            
            
              Chung
              RT
            
            
              Schneyer
              AL
            
            
              Woolf
              CJ
            
            
              Andrews
              NC
            
            
              Lin
              HY
            
          
          Bone morphogenetic protein signaling by hemojuvelin regulates hepcidin expression
          Nat Genet
          2006
          38
          531
          539
          10.1038/ng1777
          
          16604073
        
      
      
        11.
        
          
            
              Bao
              G
            
            
              Clifton
              M
            
            
              Hoette
              TM
            
            
              Mori
              K
            
            
              Deng
              SX
            
            
              Qiu
              A
            
            
              Viltard
              M
            
            
              Williams
              D
            
            
              Paragas
              N
            
            
              Leete
              T
            
            
              Kulkarni
              R
            
            
              Li
              X
            
            
              Lee
              B
            
            
              Kalandadze
              A
            
            
              Ratner
              AJ
            
            
              Pizarro
              JC
            
            
              Schmidt-Ott
              KM
            
            
              Landry
              DW
            
            
              Raymond
              KN
            
            
              Strong
              RK
            
            
              Barasch
              J
            
          
          Iron traffics in circulation bound to a siderocalin (Ngal)-catechol complex
          Nat Chem Biol
          2010
          6
          602
          609
          10.1038/nchembio.402
          
          20581821
        
      
      
        12.
        
          
            
              Baraibar
              MA
            
            
              Barbeito
              AG
            
            
              Muhoberac
              BB
            
            
              Vidal
              R
            
          
          A mutant light-chain ferritin that causes neurodegeneration has enhanced propensity toward oxidative damage
          Free Radic Biol Med
          2012
          52
          1692
          1697
          10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.02.015
          
          22348978
        
      
      
        13.
        
          
            
              Barton
              JC
            
            
              Acton
              RT
            
          
          Hemochromatosis and Vibrio vulnificus wound infections
          J Clin Gastroenterol
          2009
          43
          890
          893
          10.1097/MCG.0b013e31819069c1
          
          19349902
        
      
      
        14.
        
          
            
              Barton
              CH
            
            
              Biggs
              TE
            
            
              Baker
              ST
            
            
              Bowen
              H
            
            
              Atkinson
              PG
            
          
          Nramp1: a link between intracellular iron transport and innate resistance to intracellular pathogens
          J Leukoc Biol
          1999
          66
          757
          762
          
          10577506
        
      
      
        15.
        
          
            
              Beaumont
              C
            
            
              Leneuve
              P
            
            
              Devaux
              I
            
            
              Scoazec
              JY
            
            
              Berthier
              M
            
            
              Loiseau
              MN
            
            
              Grandchamp
              B
            
            
              Bonneau
              D
            
          
          Mutation in the iron responsive element of the L ferritin mRNA in a family with dominant hyperferritinaemia and cataract
          Nat Genet
          1995
          11
          444
          446
          10.1038/ng1295-444
          
          7493028
        
      
      
        16.
        Behnsen J, Raffatellu M (2016) Siderophores: more than stealing iron. MBio 7:e01397–16
      
      
        17.
        
          
            
              Bessis
              M
            
            
              Breton-Gorius
              J
            
          
          New observations on the erythroblast islet and rhopheocytosis of ferritin
          Rev Hematol
          1959
          14
          165
          197
          
          13675587
        
      
      
        18.
        
          
            
              Beutler
              E
            
          
          Hemochromatosis: genetics and pathophysiology
          Annu Rev Med
          2006
          57
          331
          347
          10.1146/annurev.med.57.121304.131310
          
          16409153
        
      
      
        19.
        
          
            
              Biggs
              TE
            
            
              Baker
              ST
            
            
              Botham
              MS
            
            
              Dhital
              A
            
            
              Barton
              CH
            
            
              Perry
              VH
            
          
          Nramp1 modulates iron homoeostasis in vivo and in vitro: evidence for a role in cellular iron release involving de-acidification of intracellular vesicles
          Eur J Immunol
          2001
          31
          2060
          2070
          10.1002/1521-4141(200107)31:7&lt;2060::AID-IMMU2060&gt;3.0.CO;2-L
          
          11449359
        
      
      
        20.
        
          
            
              Blackwell
              JM
            
          
          Structure and function of the natural-resistance-associated macrophage protein (Nramp1), a candidate protein for infectious and autoimmune disease susceptibility
          Mol Med Today
          1996
          2
          205
          211
          10.1016/1357-4310(96)88773-9
          
          8796889
        
      
      
        21.
        
          
            
              Bleriot
              C
            
            
              Dupuis
              T
            
            
              Jouvion
              G
            
            
              Eberl
              G
            
            
              Disson
              O
            
            
              Lecuit
              M
            
          
          Liver-resident macrophage necroptosis orchestrates type 1 microbicidal inflammation and type-2-mediated tissue repair during bacterial infection
          Immunity
          2015
          42
          145
          158
          10.1016/j.immuni.2014.12.020
          
          25577440
        
      
      
        22.
        
          
            
              Boyle
              JJ
            
            
              Harrington
              HA
            
            
              Piper
              E
            
            
              Elderfield
              K
            
            
              Stark
              J
            
            
              Landis
              RC
            
            
              Haskard
              DO
            
          
          Coronary intraplaque hemorrhage evokes a novel atheroprotective macrophage phenotype
          Am J Pathol
          2009
          174
          1097
          1108
          10.2353/ajpath.2009.080431
          
          19234137
        
      
      
        23.
        
          
            
              Brooks
              DG
            
            
              Manova-Todorova
              K
            
            
              Farmer
              J
            
            
              Lobmayr
              L
            
            
              Wilson
              RB
            
            
              Eagle
              RC
              Jr
            
            
              St Pierre
              TG
            
            
              Stambolian
              D
            
          
          Ferritin crystal cataracts in hereditary hyperferritinemia cataract syndrome
          Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
          2002
          43
          1121
          1126
          
          11923255
        
      
      
        24.
        
          
            
              Bulteau
              AL
            
            
              O'Neill
              HA
            
            
              Kennedy
              MC
            
            
              Ikeda-Saito
              M
            
            
              Isaya
              G
            
            
              Szweda
              LI
            
          
          Frataxin acts as an iron chaperone protein to modulate mitochondrial aconitase activity
          Science
          2004
          305
          242
          245
          10.1126/science.1098991
          
          15247478
        
      
      
        25.
        Buttgereit A, Lelios I, Yu X, Vrohlings M, Krakoski NR, Gautier EL, Nishinakamura R, Becher B, Greter M (2016) Sall1 is a transcriptional regulator defining microglia identity and function. Nat Immunol
      
      
        26.
        
          
            
              Camaschella
              C
            
            
              Zecchina
              G
            
            
              Lockitch
              G
            
            
              Roetto
              A
            
            
              Campanella
              A
            
            
              Arosio
              P
            
            
              Levi
              S
            
          
          A new mutation (G51C) in the iron-responsive element (IRE) of L-ferritin associated with hyperferritinaemia-cataract syndrome decreases the binding affinity of the mutated IRE for iron-regulatory proteins
          Br J Haematol
          2000
          108
          480
          482
          10.1046/j.1365-2141.2000.01920.x
          
          10759702
        
      
      
        27.
        
          
            
              Canali
              S
            
            
              Vecchi
              C
            
            
              Garuti
              C
            
            
              Montosi
              G
            
            
              Babitt
              JL
            
            
              Pietrangelo
              A
            
          
          The SMAD pathway is required for hepcidin response during endoplasmic reticulum stress
          Endocrinology
          2016
          157
          3935
          3945
          10.1210/en.2016-1258
          
          27483343
        
      
      
        28.
        Canali S, Zumbrennen-Bullough KB, Core AB, Wang CY, Nairz M, Bouley R, Swirski FK, Babitt JL (2016b) Endothelial cells produce bone morphogenetic protein 6 required for iron homeostasis in mice. Blood 129:405–414
      
      
        29.
        
          
            
              Carter
              EL
            
            
              Gupta
              N
            
            
              Ragsdale
              SW
            
          
          High affinity heme binding to a heme regulatory motif on the nuclear receptor rev-erbbeta leads to its degradation and indirectly regulates its interaction with nuclear receptor Corepressor
          J Biol Chem
          2016
          291
          2196
          2222
          10.1074/jbc.M115.670281
          
          26670607
        
      
      
        30.
        
          
            
              Cassat
              JE
            
            
              Skaar
              EP
            
          
          Iron in infection and immunity
          Cell Host Microbe
          2013
          13
          509
          519
          10.1016/j.chom.2013.04.010
          
          23684303
        
      
      
        31.
        
          
            
              Cellier
              MF
            
          
          Nramp: from sequence to structure and mechanism of divalent metal import
          Curr Top Membr
          2012
          69
          249
          293
          10.1016/B978-0-12-394390-3.00010-0
          
          23046654
        
      
      
        32.
        
          
            
              Cellier
              MF
            
            
              Courville
              P
            
            
              Campion
              C
            
          
          Nramp1 phagocyte intracellular metal withdrawal defense
          Microbes Infect
          2007
          9
          1662
          1670
          10.1016/j.micinf.2007.09.006
          
          18024118
        
      
      
        33.
        
          
            
              Chen
              H
            
            
              Su
              T
            
            
              Attieh
              ZK
            
            
              Fox
              TC
            
            
              McKie
              AT
            
            
              Anderson
              GJ
            
            
              Vulpe
              CD
            
          
          Systemic regulation of Hephaestin and Ireg1 revealed in studies of genetic and nutritional iron deficiency
          Blood
          2003
          102
          1893
          1899
          10.1182/blood-2003-02-0347
          
          12730111
        
      
      
        34.
        
          
            
              Chen
              TT
            
            
              Li
              L
            
            
              Chung
              DH
            
            
              Allen
              CD
            
            
              Torti
              SV
            
            
              Torti
              FM
            
            
              Cyster
              JG
            
            
              Chen
              CY
            
            
              Brodsky
              FM
            
            
              Niemi
              EC
            
            
              Nakamura
              MC
            
            
              Seaman
              WE
            
            
              Daws
              MR
            
          
          TIM-2 is expressed on B cells and in liver and kidney and is a receptor for H-ferritin endocytosis
          J Exp Med
          2005
          202
          955
          965
          10.1084/jem.20042433
          
          16203866
        
      
      
        35.
        
          
            
              Chen
              C
            
            
              Samuel
              TK
            
            
              Sinclair
              J
            
            
              Dailey
              HA
            
            
              Hamza
              I
            
          
          An intercellular heme-trafficking protein delivers maternal heme to the embryo during development in C. elegans
          Cell
          2011
          145
          720
          731
          10.1016/j.cell.2011.04.025
          
          21620137
        
      
      
        36.
        
          
            
              Chen-Roetling
              J
            
            
              Song
              W
            
            
              Schipper
              HM
            
            
              Regan
              CS
            
            
              Regan
              RF
            
          
          Astrocyte overexpression of heme oxygenase-1 improves outcome after intracerebral hemorrhage
          Stroke
          2015
          46
          1093
          1098
          10.1161/STROKEAHA.115.008686
          
          25690543
        
      
      
        37.
        
          
            
              Chiabrando
              D
            
            
              Fiorito
              V
            
            
              Marro
              S
            
            
              Silengo
              L
            
            
              Altruda
              F
            
            
              Tolosano
              E
            
          
          Cell-specific regulation of Ferroportin transcription following experimentally-induced acute anemia in mice
          Blood Cells Mol Dis
          2012
          50
          25
          30
          10.1016/j.bcmd.2012.08.002
          
          22921471
        
      
      
        38.
        
          
            
              Chow
              A
            
            
              Huggins
              M
            
            
              Ahmed
              J
            
            
              Hashimoto
              D
            
            
              Lucas
              D
            
            
              Kunisaki
              Y
            
            
              Pinho
              S
            
            
              Leboeuf
              M
            
            
              Noizat
              C
            
            
              van Rooijen
              N
            
            
              Tanaka
              M
            
            
              Zhao
              ZJ
            
            
              Bergman
              A
            
            
              Merad
              M
            
            
              Frenette
              PS
            
          
          CD169(+) macrophages provide a niche promoting erythropoiesis under homeostasis and stress
          Nat Med
          2013
          19
          429
          436
          10.1038/nm.3057
          
          23502962
        
      
      
        39.
        
          
            
              Clevers
              H
            
          
          The intestinal crypt, a prototype stem cell compartment
          Cell
          2013
          154
          274
          284
          10.1016/j.cell.2013.07.004
          
          23870119
        
      
      
        40.
        
          
            
              Cohen
              LA
            
            
              Gutierrez
              L
            
            
              Weiss
              A
            
            
              Leichtmann-Bardoogo
              Y
            
            
              Zhang
              DL
            
            
              Crooks
              DR
            
            
              Sougrat
              R
            
            
              Morgenstern
              A
            
            
              Galy
              B
            
            
              Hentze
              MW
            
            
              Lazaro
              FJ
            
            
              Rouault
              TA
            
            
              Meyron-Holtz
              EG
            
          
          Serum ferritin is derived primarily from macrophages through a nonclassical secretory pathway
          Blood
          2010
          116
          1574
          1584
          10.1182/blood-2009-11-253815
          
          20472835
        
      
      
        41.
        
          
            
              Corna
              G
            
            
              Caserta
              I
            
            
              Monno
              A
            
            
              Apostoli
              P
            
            
              Manfredi
              AA
            
            
              Camaschella
              C
            
            
              Rovere-Querini
              P
            
          
          The repair of skeletal muscle requires iron recycling through macrophage ferroportin
          J Immunol
          2016
          197
          1914
          1925
          10.4049/jimmunol.1501417
          
          27465531
        
      
      
        42.
        
          
            
              Correnti
              C
            
            
              Strong
              RK
            
          
          Mammalian siderophores, siderophore-binding lipocalins, and the labile iron pool
          J Biol Chem
          2012
          287
          13524
          13531
          10.1074/jbc.R111.311829
          
          22389496
        
      
      
        43.
        
          
            
              Courties
              G
            
            
              Heidt
              T
            
            
              Sebas
              M
            
            
              Iwamoto
              Y
            
            
              Jeon
              D
            
            
              Truelove
              J
            
            
              Tricot
              B
            
            
              Wojtkiewicz
              G
            
            
              Dutta
              P
            
            
              Sager
              HB
            
            
              Borodovsky
              A
            
            
              Novobrantseva
              T
            
            
              Klebanov
              B
            
            
              Fitzgerald
              K
            
            
              Anderson
              DG
            
            
              Libby
              P
            
            
              Swirski
              FK
            
            
              Weissleder
              R
            
            
              Nahrendorf
              M
            
          
          In vivo silencing of the transcription factor IRF5 reprograms the macrophage phenotype and improves infarct healing
          J Am Coll Cardiol
          2013
          63
          1556
          1566
          10.1016/j.jacc.2013.11.023
          
          24361318
        
      
      
        44.
        
          
            
              Cozzi
              A
            
            
              Santambrogio
              P
            
            
              Privitera
              D
            
            
              Broccoli
              V
            
            
              Rotundo
              LI
            
            
              Garavaglia
              B
            
            
              Benz
              R
            
            
              Altamura
              S
            
            
              Goede
              JS
            
            
              Muckenthaler
              MU
            
            
              Levi
              S
            
          
          Human L-ferritin deficiency is characterized by idiopathic generalized seizures and atypical restless leg syndrome
          J Exp Med
          2013
          210
          1779
          1791
          10.1084/jem.20130315
          
          23940258
        
      
      
        45.
        
          
            
              Curtis
              AR
            
            
              Fey
              C
            
            
              Morris
              CM
            
            
              Bindoff
              LA
            
            
              Ince
              PG
            
            
              Chinnery
              PF
            
            
              Coulthard
              A
            
            
              Jackson
              MJ
            
            
              Jackson
              AP
            
            
              McHale
              DP
            
            
              Hay
              D
            
            
              Barker
              WA
            
            
              Markham
              AF
            
            
              Bates
              D
            
            
              Curtis
              A
            
            
              Burn
              J
            
          
          Mutation in the gene encoding ferritin light polypeptide causes dominant adult-onset basal ganglia disease
          Nat Genet
          2001
          28
          350
          354
          10.1038/ng571
          
          11438811
        
      
      
        46.
        
          
            
              Darshan
              D
            
            
              Vanoaica
              L
            
            
              Richman
              L
            
            
              Beermann
              F
            
            
              Kuhn
              LC
            
          
          Conditional deletion of ferritin H in mice induces loss of iron storage and liver damage
          Hepatology
          2009
          50
          852
          860
          10.1002/hep.23058
          
          19492434
        
      
      
        47.
        
          
            
              Davuluri
              G
            
            
              Song
              P
            
            
              Liu
              Z
            
            
              Wald
              D
            
            
              Sakaguchi
              TF
            
            
              Green
              MR
            
            
              Devireddy
              L
            
          
          Inactivation of 3-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase 2 delays zebrafish erythroid maturation by conferring premature mitophagy
          Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
          2016
          113
          E1460
          E1469
          10.1073/pnas.1600077113
          
          26929344
        
      
      
        48.
        
          
            
              Delaby
              C
            
            
              Pilard
              N
            
            
              Hetet
              G
            
            
              Driss
              F
            
            
              Grandchamp
              B
            
            
              Beaumont
              C
            
            
              Canonne-Hergaux
              F
            
          
          A physiological model to study iron recycling in macrophages
          Exp Cell Res
          2005
          310
          43
          53
          10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.07.002
          
          16095591
        
      
      
        49.
        
          
            
              Devireddy
              LR
            
            
              Gazin
              C
            
            
              Zhu
              X
            
            
              Green
              MR
            
          
          A cell-surface receptor for lipocalin 24p3 selectively mediates apoptosis and iron uptake
          Cell
          2005
          123
          1293
          1305
          10.1016/j.cell.2005.10.027
          
          16377569
        
      
      
        50.
        
          
            
              Devireddy
              LR
            
            
              Hart
              DO
            
            
              Goetz
              DH
            
            
              Green
              MR
            
          
          A mammalian siderophore synthesized by an enzyme with a bacterial homolog involved in enterobactin production
          Cell
          2010
          141
          1006
          1017
          10.1016/j.cell.2010.04.040
          
          20550936
        
      
      
        51.
        
          
            
              Dhakshinamoorthy
              S
            
            
              Jain
              AK
            
            
              Bloom
              DA
            
            
              Jaiswal
              AK
            
          
          Bach1 competes with Nrf2 leading to negative regulation of the antioxidant response element (ARE)-mediated NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1 gene expression and induction in response to antioxidants
          J Biol Chem
          2005
          280
          16891
          16900
          10.1074/jbc.M500166200
          
          15734732
        
      
      
        52.
        
          
            
              Dimitrov
              JD
            
            
              Ivanovska
              ND
            
            
              Lacroix-Desmazes
              S
            
            
              Doltchinkova
              VR
            
            
              Kaveri
              SV
            
            
              Vassilev
              TL
            
          
          Ferrous ions and reactive oxygen species increase antigen-binding and anti-inflammatory activities of immunoglobulin G
          J Biol Chem
          2006
          281
          439
          446
          10.1074/jbc.M509190200
          
          16246843
        
      
      
        53.
        
          
            
              Dimitrov
              JD
            
            
              Roumenina
              LT
            
            
              Doltchinkova
              VR
            
            
              Mihaylova
              NM
            
            
              Lacroix-Desmazes
              S
            
            
              Kaveri
              SV
            
            
              Vassilev
              TL
            
          
          Antibodies use heme as a cofactor to extend their pathogen elimination activity and to acquire new effector functions
          J Biol Chem
          2007
          282
          26696
          26706
          10.1074/jbc.M702751200
          
          17636257
        
      
      
        54.
        
          
            
              Dixon
              SJ
            
            
              Lemberg
              KM
            
            
              Lamprecht
              MR
            
            
              Skouta
              R
            
            
              Zaitsev
              EM
            
            
              Gleason
              CE
            
            
              Patel
              DN
            
            
              Bauer
              AJ
            
            
              Cantley
              AM
            
            
              Yang
              WS
            
            
              Morrison
              B
              3rd
            
            
              Stockwell
              BR
            
          
          Ferroptosis: an iron-dependent form of nonapoptotic cell death
          Cell
          2012
          149
          1060
          1072
          10.1016/j.cell.2012.03.042
          
          22632970
        
      
      
        55.
        
          
            
              Dlaska
              M
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          Central role of transcription factor NF-IL6 for cytokine and iron-mediated regulation of murine inducible nitric oxide synthase expression
          J Immunol
          1999
          162
          6171
          6177
          
          10229861
        
      
      
        56.
        
          
            
              Donovan
              A
            
            
              Brownlie
              A
            
            
              Zhou
              Y
            
            
              Shepard
              J
            
            
              Pratt
              SJ
            
            
              Moynihan
              J
            
            
              Paw
              BH
            
            
              Drejer
              A
            
            
              Barut
              B
            
            
              Zapata
              A
            
            
              Law
              TC
            
            
              Brugnara
              C
            
            
              Lux
              SE
            
            
              Pinkus
              GS
            
            
              Pinkus
              JL
            
            
              Kingsley
              PD
            
            
              Palis
              J
            
            
              Fleming
              MD
            
            
              Andrews
              NC
            
            
              Zon
              LI
            
          
          Positional cloning of zebrafish ferroportin1 identifies a conserved vertebrate iron exporter
          Nature
          2000
          403
          776
          781
          10.1038/35001596
          
          10693807
        
      
      
        57.
        
          
            
              Drakesmith
              H
            
            
              Prentice
              AM
            
          
          Hepcidin and the iron-infection axis
          Science
          2012
          338
          768
          772
          10.1126/science.1224577
          
          23139325
        
      
      
        58.
        
          
            
              Drakesmith
              H
            
            
              Schimanski
              LM
            
            
              Ormerod
              E
            
            
              Merryweather-Clarke
              AT
            
            
              Viprakasit
              V
            
            
              Edwards
              JP
            
            
              Sweetland
              E
            
            
              Bastin
              JM
            
            
              Cowley
              D
            
            
              Chinthammitr
              Y
            
            
              Robson
              KJ
            
            
              Townsend
              AR
            
          
          Resistance to hepcidin is conferred by hemochromatosis-associated mutations of ferroportin
          Blood
          2005
          106
          1092
          1097
          10.1182/blood-2005-02-0561
          
          15831700
        
      
      
        59.
        
          
            
              Drakesmith
              H
            
            
              Nemeth
              E
            
            
              Ganz
              T
            
          
          Ironing out ferroportin
          Cell Metab
          2015
          22
          777
          787
          10.1016/j.cmet.2015.09.006
          
          26437604
        
      
      
        60.
        
          
            
              Dutra
              FF
            
            
              Alves
              LS
            
            
              Rodrigues
              D
            
            
              Fernandez
              PL
            
            
              de Oliveira
              RB
            
            
              Golenbock
              DT
            
            
              Zamboni
              DS
            
            
              Bozza
              MT
            
          
          Hemolysis-induced lethality involves inflammasome activation by heme
          Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
          2014
          111
          E4110
          E4118
          10.1073/pnas.1405023111
          
          25225402
        
      
      
        61.
        
          
            
              Dutta
              P
            
            
              Hoyer
              FF
            
            
              Grigoryeva
              LS
            
            
              Sager
              HB
            
            
              Leuschner
              F
            
            
              Courties
              G
            
            
              Borodovsky
              A
            
            
              Novobrantseva
              T
            
            
              Ruda
              VM
            
            
              Fitzgerald
              K
            
            
              Iwamoto
              Y
            
            
              Wojtkiewicz
              G
            
            
              Sun
              Y
            
            
              Da Silva
              N
            
            
              Libby
              P
            
            
              Anderson
              DG
            
            
              Swirski
              FK
            
            
              Weissleder
              R
            
            
              Nahrendorf
              M
            
          
          Macrophages retain hematopoietic stem cells in the spleen via VCAM-1
          J Exp Med
          2015
          212
          497
          512
          10.1084/jem.20141642
          
          25800955
        
      
      
        62.
        
          
            
              El Kasmi
              KC
            
            
              Qualls
              JE
            
            
              Pesce
              JT
            
            
              Smith
              AM
            
            
              Thompson
              RW
            
            
              Henao-Tamayo
              M
            
            
              Basaraba
              RJ
            
            
              Konig
              T
            
            
              Schleicher
              U
            
            
              Koo
              MS
            
            
              Kaplan
              G
            
            
              Fitzgerald
              KA
            
            
              Tuomanen
              EI
            
            
              Orme
              IM
            
            
              Kanneganti
              TD
            
            
              Bogdan
              C
            
            
              Wynn
              TA
            
            
              Murray
              PJ
            
          
          Toll-like receptor-induced arginase 1 in macrophages thwarts effective immunity against intracellular pathogens
          Nat Immunol
          2008
          9
          1399
          1406
          10.1038/ni.1671
          
          18978793
        
      
      
        63.
        
          
            
              Fang
              HY
            
            
              Hughes
              R
            
            
              Murdoch
              C
            
            
              Coffelt
              SB
            
            
              Biswas
              SK
            
            
              Harris
              AL
            
            
              Johnson
              RS
            
            
              Imityaz
              HZ
            
            
              Simon
              MC
            
            
              Fredlund
              E
            
            
              Greten
              FR
            
            
              Rius
              J
            
            
              Lewis
              CE
            
          
          Hypoxia-inducible factors 1 and 2 are important transcriptional effectors in primary macrophages experiencing hypoxia
          Blood
          2009
          114
          844
          859
          10.1182/blood-2008-12-195941
          
          19454749
        
      
      
        64.
        
          
            
              Farin
              HF
            
            
              Karthaus
              WR
            
            
              Kujala
              P
            
            
              Rakhshandehroo
              M
            
            
              Schwank
              G
            
            
              Vries
              RG
            
            
              Kalkhoven
              E
            
            
              Nieuwenhuis
              EE
            
            
              Clevers
              H
            
          
          Paneth cell extrusion and release of antimicrobial products is directly controlled by immune cell-derived IFN-gamma
          J Exp Med
          2014
          211
          1393
          1405
          10.1084/jem.20130753
          
          24980747
        
      
      
        65.
        
          
            
              Fernandez
              PL
            
            
              Dutra
              FF
            
            
              Alves
              L
            
            
              Figueiredo
              RT
            
            
              Mourao-Sa
              D
            
            
              Fortes
              GB
            
            
              Bergstrand
              S
            
            
              Lonn
              D
            
            
              Cevallos
              RR
            
            
              Pereira
              RM
            
            
              Lopes
              UG
            
            
              Travassos
              LH
            
            
              Paiva
              CN
            
            
              Bozza
              MT
            
          
          Heme amplifies the innate immune response to microbial molecules through spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk)-dependent reactive oxygen species generation
          J Biol Chem
          2010
          285
          32844
          32851
          10.1074/jbc.M110.146076
          
          20729208
        
      
      
        66.
        
          
            
              Figueiredo
              RT
            
            
              Fernandez
              PL
            
            
              Mourao-Sa
              DS
            
            
              Porto
              BN
            
            
              Dutra
              FF
            
            
              Alves
              LS
            
            
              Oliveira
              MF
            
            
              Oliveira
              PL
            
            
              Graca-Souza
              AV
            
            
              Bozza
              MT
            
          
          Characterization of heme as activator of Toll-like receptor 4
          J Biol Chem
          2007
          282
          20221
          20229
          10.1074/jbc.M610737200
          
          17502383
        
      
      
        67.
        
          
            
              Fischbach
              MA
            
            
              Lin
              H
            
            
              Liu
              DR
            
            
              Walsh
              CT
            
          
          How pathogenic bacteria evade mammalian sabotage in the battle for iron
          Nat Chem Biol
          2006
          2
          132
          138
          10.1038/nchembio771
          
          16485005
        
      
      
        68.
        
          
            
              Fleming
              MD
            
            
              Trenor
              CC
              3rd
            
            
              Su
              MA
            
            
              Foernzler
              D
            
            
              Beier
              DR
            
            
              Dietrich
              WF
            
            
              Andrews
              NC
            
          
          Microcytic anaemia mice have a mutation in Nramp2, a candidate iron transporter gene
          Nat Genet
          1997
          16
          383
          386
          
          9241278
        
      
      
        69.
        
          
            
              Fleming
              MD
            
            
              Romano
              MA
            
            
              Su
              MA
            
            
              Garrick
              LM
            
            
              Garrick
              MD
            
            
              Andrews
              NC
            
          
          Nramp2 is mutated in the anemic Belgrade (b) rat: evidence of a role for Nramp2 in endosomal iron transport
          Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
          1998
          95
          1148
          1153
          10.1073/pnas.95.3.1148
          
          9448300
        
      
      
        70.
        
          
            
              Flo
              TH
            
            
              Smith
              KD
            
            
              Sato
              S
            
            
              Rodriguez
              DJ
            
            
              Holmes
              MA
            
            
              Strong
              RK
            
            
              Akira
              S
            
            
              Aderem
              A
            
          
          Lipocalin 2 mediates an innate immune response to bacterial infection by sequestrating iron
          Nature
          2004
          432
          917
          921
          10.1038/nature03104
          
          15531878
        
      
      
        71.
        
          
            
              Forbes
              JR
            
            
              Gros
              P
            
          
          Divalent-metal transport by NRAMP proteins at the interface of host-pathogen interactions
          Trends Microbiol
          2001
          9
          397
          403
          10.1016/S0966-842X(01)02098-4
          
          11514223
        
      
      
        72.
        
          
            
              Franken
              L
            
            
              Klein
              M
            
            
              Spasova
              M
            
            
              Elsukova
              A
            
            
              Wiedwald
              U
            
            
              Welz
              M
            
            
              Knolle
              P
            
            
              Farle
              M
            
            
              Limmer
              A
            
            
              Kurts
              C
            
          
          Splenic red pulp macrophages are intrinsically superparamagnetic and contaminate magnetic cell isolates
          Sci Rep
          2015
          5
          12940
          10.1038/srep12940
          
          26260698
        
      
      
        73.
        
          
            
              Fraser
              ST
            
            
              Midwinter
              RG
            
            
              Coupland
              LA
            
            
              Kong
              S
            
            
              Berger
              BS
            
            
              Yeo
              JH
            
            
              Andrade
              OC
            
            
              Cromer
              D
            
            
              Suarna
              C
            
            
              Lam
              M
            
            
              Maghzal
              GJ
            
            
              Chong
              BH
            
            
              Parish
              CR
            
            
              Stocker
              R
            
          
          Heme oxygenase-1 deficiency alters erythroblastic island formation, steady-state erythropoiesis and red blood cell lifespan in mice
          Haematologica
          2015
          100
          601
          610
          10.3324/haematol.2014.116368
          
          25682599
        
      
      
        74.
        
          
            
              Fritsche
              G
            
            
              Dlaska
              M
            
            
              Barton
              H
            
            
              Theurl
              I
            
            
              Garimorth
              K
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          Nramp1 functionality increases inducible nitric oxide synthase transcription via stimulation of IFN regulatory factor 1 expression
          J Immunol
          2003
          171
          1994
          1998
          10.4049/jimmunol.171.4.1994
          
          12902503
        
      
      
        75.
        
          
            
              Fritsche
              G
            
            
              Nairz
              M
            
            
              Theurl
              I
            
            
              Mair
              S
            
            
              Bellmann-Weiler
              R
            
            
              Barton
              HC
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          Modulation of macrophage iron transport by Nramp1 (Slc11a1)
          Immunobiology
          2007
          212
          751
          757
          10.1016/j.imbio.2007.09.014
          
          18086376
        
      
      
        76.
        
          
            
              Gaenzer
              H
            
            
              Marschang
              P
            
            
              Sturm
              W
            
            
              Neumayr
              G
            
            
              Vogel
              W
            
            
              Patsch
              J
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          Association between increased iron stores and impaired endothelial function in patients with hereditary hemochromatosis
          J Am Coll Cardiol
          2002
          40
          2189
          2194
          10.1016/S0735-1097(02)02611-6
          
          12505233
        
      
      
        77.
        
          
            
              Galy
              B
            
            
              Ferring-Appel
              D
            
            
              Kaden
              S
            
            
              Grone
              HJ
            
            
              Hentze
              MW
            
          
          Iron regulatory proteins are essential for intestinal function and control key iron absorption molecules in the duodenum
          Cell Metab
          2008
          7
          79
          85
          10.1016/j.cmet.2007.10.006
          
          18177727
        
      
      
        78.
        
          
            
              Ganz
              T
            
          
          Macrophages and systemic iron homeostasis
          J Innate Immun
          2012
          4
          446
          453
          10.1159/000336423
          
          22441209
        
      
      
        79.
        
          
            
              Ganz
              T
            
            
              Nemeth
              E
            
          
          Iron homeostasis in host defence and inflammation
          Nat Rev Immunol
          2015
          15
          500
          510
          10.1038/nri3863
          
          26160612
        
      
      
        80.
        
          
            
              Gardi
              C
            
            
              Arezzini
              B
            
            
              Fortino
              V
            
            
              Comporti
              M
            
          
          Effect of free iron on collagen synthesis, cell proliferation and MMP-2 expression in rat hepatic stellate cells
          Biochem Pharmacol
          2002
          64
          1139
          1145
          10.1016/S0006-2952(02)01257-1
          
          12234617
        
      
      
        81.
        
          
            
              Garton
              KJ
            
            
              Gough
              PJ
            
            
              Philalay
              J
            
            
              Wille
              PT
            
            
              Blobel
              CP
            
            
              Whitehead
              RH
            
            
              Dempsey
              PJ
            
            
              Raines
              EW
            
          
          Stimulated shedding of vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1) is mediated by tumor necrosis factor-alpha-converting enzyme (ADAM 17)
          J Biol Chem
          2003
          278
          37459
          37464
          10.1074/jbc.M305877200
          
          12878595
        
      
      
        82.
        
          
            
              Ginhoux
              F
            
            
              Guilliams
              M
            
          
          Tissue-resident macrophage ontogeny and homeostasis
          Immunity
          2016
          44
          439
          449
          10.1016/j.immuni.2016.02.024
          
          26982352
        
      
      
        83.
        
          
            
              Girelli
              D
            
            
              Corrocher
              R
            
            
              Bisceglia
              L
            
            
              Olivieri
              O
            
            
              De Franceschi
              L
            
            
              Zelante
              L
            
            
              Gasparini
              P
            
          
          Molecular basis for the recently described hereditary hyperferritinemia-cataract syndrome: a mutation in the iron-responsive element of ferritin L-subunit gene (the “Verona mutation”)
          Blood
          1995
          86
          4050
          4053
          
          7492760
        
      
      
        84.
        
          
            
              Goldmann
              T
            
            
              Wieghofer
              P
            
            
              Jordao
              MJ
            
            
              Prutek
              F
            
            
              Hagemeyer
              N
            
            
              Frenzel
              K
            
            
              Amann
              L
            
            
              Staszewski
              O
            
            
              Kierdorf
              K
            
            
              Krueger
              M
            
            
              Locatelli
              G
            
            
              Hochgerner
              H
            
            
              Zeiser
              R
            
            
              Epelman
              S
            
            
              Geissmann
              F
            
            
              Priller
              J
            
            
              Rossi
              FM
            
            
              Bechmann
              I
            
            
              Kerschensteiner
              M
            
            
              Linnarsson
              S
            
            
              Jung
              S
            
            
              Prinz
              M
            
          
          Origin, fate and dynamics of macrophages at central nervous system interfaces
          Nat Immunol
          2016
          17
          797
          805
          10.1038/ni.3423
          
          27135602
        
      
      
        85.
        
          
            
              Gordon
              S
            
            
              Taylor
              PR
            
          
          Monocyte and macrophage heterogeneity
          Nat Rev Immunol
          2005
          5
          953
          964
          10.1038/nri1733
          
          16322748
        
      
      
        86.
        
          
            
              Haas
              H
            
          
          Fungal siderophore metabolism with a focus on Aspergillus fumigatus
          Nat Prod Rep
          2014
          31
          1266
          1276
          10.1039/C4NP00071D
          
          25140791
        
      
      
        87.
        
          
            
              Habib
              A
            
            
              Polavarapu
              R
            
            
              Karmali
              V
            
            
              Guo
              L
            
            
              Van Dam
              R
            
            
              Cheng
              Q
            
            
              Akahori
              H
            
            
              Saeed
              O
            
            
              Nakano
              M
            
            
              Pachura
              K
            
            
              Hong
              CC
            
            
              Shin
              E
            
            
              Kolodgie
              F
            
            
              Virmani
              R
            
            
              Finn
              AV
            
          
          Hepcidin-ferroportin axis controls toll-like receptor 4 dependent macrophage inflammatory responses in human atherosclerotic plaques
          Atherosclerosis
          2015
          241
          692
          700
          10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2015.06.025
          
          26125411
        
      
      
        88.
        
          
            
              Haldar
              M
            
            
              Kohyama
              M
            
            
              So
              AY
            
            
              Kc
              W
            
            
              Wu
              X
            
            
              Briseno
              CG
            
            
              Satpathy
              AT
            
            
              Kretzer
              NM
            
            
              Arase
              H
            
            
              Rajasekaran
              NS
            
            
              Wang
              L
            
            
              Egawa
              T
            
            
              Igarashi
              K
            
            
              Baltimore
              D
            
            
              Murphy
              TL
            
            
              Murphy
              KM
            
          
          Heme-mediated SPI-C induction promotes monocyte differentiation into iron-recycling macrophages
          Cell
          2014
          156
          1223
          1234
          10.1016/j.cell.2014.01.069
          
          24630724
        
      
      
        89.
        
          
            
              Hamza
              I
            
            
              Dailey
              HA
            
          
          One ring to rule them all: trafficking of heme and heme synthesis intermediates in the metazoans
          Biochim Biophys Acta
          2012
          1823
          1617
          1632
          10.1016/j.bbamcr.2012.04.009
          
          22575458
        
      
      
        90.
        
          
            
              Han
              J
            
            
              Seaman
              WE
            
            
              Di
              X
            
            
              Wang
              W
            
            
              Willingham
              M
            
            
              Torti
              FM
            
            
              Torti
              SV
            
          
          Iron uptake mediated by binding of H-ferritin to the TIM-2 receptor in mouse cells
          PLoS One
          2011
          6
          e23800
          10.1371/journal.pone.0023800
          
          21886823
        
      
      
        91.
        
          
            
              Haschka
              D
            
            
              Nairz
              M
            
            
              Demetz
              E
            
            
              Wienerroither
              S
            
            
              Decker
              T
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          Contrasting regulation of macrophage iron homeostasis in response to infection with Listeria monocytogenes depending on localization of bacteria
          Metallomics
          2015
          7
          1036
          1045
          10.1039/C4MT00328D
          
          25869778
        
      
      
        92.
        
          
            
              Haubner
              BJ
            
            
              Schneider
              J
            
            
              Schweigmann
              U
            
            
              Schuetz
              T
            
            
              Dichtl
              W
            
            
              Velik-Salchner
              C
            
            
              Stein
              JI
            
            
              Penninger
              JM
            
          
          Functional recovery of a human neonatal heart after severe myocardial infarction
          Circ Res
          2015
          118
          216
          221
          10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.307017
          
          26659640
        
      
      
        93.
        
          
            
              He
              S
            
            
              Chousterman
              BG
            
            
              Fenn
              A
            
            
              Anzai
              A
            
            
              Nairz
              M
            
            
              Brandt
              M
            
            
              Hilgendorf
              I
            
            
              Sun
              Y
            
            
              Ye
              YX
            
            
              Iwamoto
              Y
            
            
              Tricot
              B
            
            
              Weissleder
              R
            
            
              Macphee
              C
            
            
              Libby
              P
            
            
              Nahrendorf
              M
            
            
              Swirski
              FK
            
          
          Lp-PLA2 antagonizes left ventricular healing after myocardial infarction by impairing the appearance of reparative macrophages
          Circ Heart Fail
          2016
          8
          980
          987
          10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.115.002334
        
      
      
        94.
        
          
            
              Heiland
              GR
            
            
              Aigner
              E
            
            
              Dallos
              T
            
            
              Sahinbegovic
              E
            
            
              Krenn
              V
            
            
              Thaler
              C
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
            
              Distler
              JH
            
            
              Datz
              C
            
            
              Schett
              G
            
            
              Zwerina
              J
            
          
          Synovial immunopathology in haemochromatosis arthropathy
          Ann Rheum Dis
          2010
          69
          1214
          1219
          10.1136/ard.2009.120204
          
          19933745
        
      
      
        95.
        
          
            
              Hentze
              MW
            
            
              Muckenthaler
              MU
            
            
              Galy
              B
            
            
              Camaschella
              C
            
          
          Two to tango: regulation of mammalian iron metabolism
          Cell
          2010
          142
          24
          38
          10.1016/j.cell.2010.06.028
          
          20603012
        
      
      
        96.
        
          
            
              Hilgendorf
              I
            
            
              Gerhardt
              LM
            
            
              Tan
              TC
            
            
              Winter
              C
            
            
              Holderried
              TA
            
            
              Chousterman
              BG
            
            
              Iwamoto
              Y
            
            
              Liao
              R
            
            
              Zirlik
              A
            
            
              Scherer-Crosbie
              M
            
            
              Hedrick
              CC
            
            
              Libby
              P
            
            
              Nahrendorf
              M
            
            
              Weissleder
              R
            
            
              Swirski
              FK
            
          
          Ly-6Chigh monocytes depend on Nr4a1 to balance both inflammatory and reparative phases in the infarcted myocardium
          Circ Res
          2014
          114
          1611
          1622
          10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.114.303204
          
          24625784
        
      
      
        97.
        
          
            
              Hornig
              R
            
            
              Lutz
              HU
            
          
          Band 3 protein clustering on human erythrocytes promotes binding of naturally occurring anti-band 3 and anti-spectrin antibodies
          Exp Gerontol
          2000
          35
          1025
          1044
          10.1016/S0531-5565(00)00126-1
          
          11121688
        
      
      
        98.
        
          
            
              Huang
              ML
            
            
              Becker
              EM
            
            
              Whitnall
              M
            
            
              Suryo Rahmanto
              Y
            
            
              Ponka
              P
            
            
              Richardson
              DR
            
          
          Elucidation of the mechanism of mitochondrial iron loading in Friedreich’s ataxia by analysis of a mouse mutant
          Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
          2009
          106
          16381
          16386
          10.1073/pnas.0906784106
          
          19805308
        
      
      
        99.
        
          
            
              Hubert
              N
            
            
              Hentze
              MW
            
          
          Previously uncharacterized isoforms of divalent metal transporter (DMT)-1: implications for regulation and cellular function
          Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
          2002
          99
          12345
          12350
          10.1073/pnas.192423399
          
          12209011
        
      
      
        100.
        
          
            
              Hvidberg
              V
            
            
              Maniecki
              MB
            
            
              Jacobsen
              C
            
            
              Hojrup
              P
            
            
              Moller
              HJ
            
            
              Moestrup
              SK
            
          
          Identification of the receptor scavenging hemopexin-heme complexes
          Blood
          2005
          106
          2572
          2579
          10.1182/blood-2005-03-1185
          
          15947085
        
      
      
        101.
        
          
            
              Ishii
              KA
            
            
              Fumoto
              T
            
            
              Iwai
              K
            
            
              Takeshita
              S
            
            
              Ito
              M
            
            
              Shimohata
              N
            
            
              Aburatani
              H
            
            
              Taketani
              S
            
            
              Lelliott
              CJ
            
            
              Vidal-Puig
              A
            
            
              Ikeda
              K
            
          
          Coordination of PGC-1beta and iron uptake in mitochondrial biogenesis and osteoclast activation
          Nat Med
          2009
          15
          259
          266
          10.1038/nm.1910
          
          19252502
        
      
      
        102.
        
          
            
              Iwasaki
              K
            
            
              Mackenzie
              EL
            
            
              Hailemariam
              K
            
            
              Sakamoto
              K
            
            
              Tsuji
              Y
            
          
          Hemin-mediated regulation of an antioxidant-responsive element of the human ferritin H gene and role of Ref-1 during erythroid differentiation of K562 cells
          Mol Cell Biol
          2006
          26
          2845
          2856
          10.1128/MCB.26.7.2845-2856.2006
          
          16537925
        
      
      
        103.
        
          
            
              Jabara
              HH
            
            
              Boyden
              SE
            
            
              Chou
              J
            
            
              Ramesh
              N
            
            
              Massaad
              MJ
            
            
              Benson
              H
            
            
              Bainter
              W
            
            
              Fraulino
              D
            
            
              Rahimov
              F
            
            
              Sieff
              C
            
            
              Liu
              ZJ
            
            
              Alshemmari
              SH
            
            
              Al-Ramadi
              BK
            
            
              Al-Dhekri
              H
            
            
              Arnaout
              R
            
            
              Abu-Shukair
              M
            
            
              Vatsayan
              A
            
            
              Silver
              E
            
            
              Ahuja
              S
            
            
              Davies
              EG
            
            
              Sola-Visner
              M
            
            
              Ohsumi
              TK
            
            
              Andrews
              NC
            
            
              Notarangelo
              LD
            
            
              Fleming
              MD
            
            
              Al-Herz
              W
            
            
              Kunkel
              LM
            
            
              Geha
              RS
            
          
          A missense mutation in TFRC, encoding transferrin receptor 1, causes combined immunodeficiency
          Nat Genet
          2016
          48
          74
          78
          10.1038/ng.3465
          
          26642240
        
      
      
        104.
        
          
            
              Jha
              MK
            
            
              Lee
              S
            
            
              Park
              DH
            
            
              Kook
              H
            
            
              Park
              KG
            
            
              Lee
              IK
            
            
              Suk
              K
            
          
          Diverse functional roles of lipocalin-2 in the central nervous system
          Neurosci Biobehav Rev
          2014
          49
          135
          156
          10.1016/j.neubiorev.2014.12.006
          
          25511817
        
      
      
        105.
        
          
            
              Ji
              J
            
            
              Zhou
              Y
            
            
              Hao
              S
            
            
              Wang
              Q
            
            
              Li
              K
            
            
              Qiao
              T
            
          
          Low expression of ferroxidases is implicated in the iron retention in human atherosclerotic plaques
          Biochem Biophys Res Commun
          2015
          464
          1134
          1138
          10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.07.091
          
          26208458
        
      
      
        106.
        
          
            
              Jones
              RL
            
            
              Peterson
              CM
            
            
              Grady
              RW
            
            
              Cerami
              A
            
          
          Low molecular weight iron-binding factor from mammalian tissue that potentiates bacterial growth
          J Exp Med
          1980
          151
          418
          428
          10.1084/jem.151.2.418
          
          6985950
        
      
      
        107.
        
          
            
              Kautz
              L
            
            
              Gabayan
              V
            
            
              Wang
              X
            
            
              Wu
              J
            
            
              Onwuzurike
              J
            
            
              Jung
              G
            
            
              Qiao
              B
            
            
              Lusis
              AJ
            
            
              Ganz
              T
            
            
              Nemeth
              E
            
          
          Testing the iron hypothesis in a mouse model of atherosclerosis
          Cell Rep
          2013
          5
          1436
          1442
          10.1016/j.celrep.2013.11.009
          
          24316081
        
      
      
        108.
        
          
            
              Keel
              SB
            
            
              Doty
              RT
            
            
              Yang
              Z
            
            
              Quigley
              JG
            
            
              Chen
              J
            
            
              Knoblaugh
              S
            
            
              Kingsley
              PD
            
            
              De Domenico
              I
            
            
              Vaughn
              MB
            
            
              Kaplan
              J
            
            
              Palis
              J
            
            
              Abkowitz
              JL
            
          
          A heme export protein is required for red blood cell differentiation and iron homeostasis
          Science
          2008
          319
          825
          828
          10.1126/science.1151133
          
          18258918
        
      
      
        109.
        
          
            
              Khandelwal
              S
            
            
              van Rooijen
              N
            
            
              Saxena
              RK
            
          
          Reduced expression of CD47 during murine red blood cell (RBC) senescence and its role in RBC clearance from the circulation
          Transfusion
          2007
          47
          1725
          1732
          10.1111/j.1537-2995.2007.01348.x
          
          17725740
        
      
      
        110.
        
          
            
              Kiechl
              S
            
            
              Aichner
              F
            
            
              Gerstenbrand
              F
            
            
              Egger
              G
            
            
              Mair
              A
            
            
              Rungger
              G
            
            
              Spogler
              F
            
            
              Jarosch
              E
            
            
              Oberhollenzer
              F
            
            
              Willeit
              J
            
          
          Body iron stores and presence of carotid atherosclerosis. Results from the Bruneck Study
          Arterioscler Thromb
          1994
          14
          1625
          1630
          10.1161/01.ATV.14.10.1625
          
          7918313
        
      
      
        111.
        
          
            
              Kiechl
              S
            
            
              Willeit
              J
            
            
              Egger
              G
            
            
              Poewe
              W
            
            
              Oberhollenzer
              F
            
          
          Body iron stores and the risk of carotid atherosclerosis: prospective results from the Bruneck study
          Circulation
          1997
          96
          3300
          3307
          10.1161/01.CIR.96.10.3300
          
          9396420
        
      
      
        112.
        
          
            
              Kim
              SE
            
            
              Zhang
              L
            
            
              Ma
              K
            
            
              Riegman
              M
            
            
              Chen
              F
            
            
              Ingold
              I
            
            
              Conrad
              M
            
            
              Turker
              MZ
            
            
              Gao
              M
            
            
              Jiang
              X
            
            
              Monette
              S
            
            
              Pauliah
              M
            
            
              Gonen
              M
            
            
              Zanzonico
              P
            
            
              Quinn
              T
            
            
              Wiesner
              U
            
            
              Bradbury
              MS
            
            
              Overholtzer
              M
            
          
          Ultrasmall nanoparticles induce ferroptosis in nutrient-deprived cancer cells and suppress tumour growth
          Nat Nanotechnol
          2016
          11
          977
          985
          10.1038/nnano.2016.164
          
          27668796
        
      
      
        113.
        
          
            
              Knutson
              MD
            
            
              Oukka
              M
            
            
              Koss
              LM
            
            
              Aydemir
              F
            
            
              Wessling-Resnick
              M
            
          
          Iron release from macrophages after erythrophagocytosis is up-regulated by ferroportin 1 overexpression and down-regulated by hepcidin
          Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
          2005
          102
          1324
          1328
          10.1073/pnas.0409409102
          
          15665091
        
      
      
        114.
        
          
            
              Kobayashi
              N
            
            
              Karisola
              P
            
            
              Pena-Cruz
              V
            
            
              Dorfman
              DM
            
            
              Jinushi
              M
            
            
              Umetsu
              SE
            
            
              Butte
              MJ
            
            
              Nagumo
              H
            
            
              Chernova
              I
            
            
              Zhu
              B
            
            
              Sharpe
              AH
            
            
              Ito
              S
            
            
              Dranoff
              G
            
            
              Kaplan
              GG
            
            
              Casasnovas
              JM
            
            
              Umetsu
              DT
            
            
              Dekruyff
              RH
            
            
              Freeman
              GJ
            
          
          TIM-1 and TIM-4 glycoproteins bind phosphatidylserine and mediate uptake of apoptotic cells
          Immunity
          2007
          27
          927
          940
          10.1016/j.immuni.2007.11.011
          
          18082433
        
      
      
        115.
        
          
            
              Koeppen
              AH
            
            
              Ramirez
              RL
            
            
              Becker
              AB
            
            
              Bjork
              ST
            
            
              Levi
              S
            
            
              Santambrogio
              P
            
            
              Parsons
              PJ
            
            
              Kruger
              PC
            
            
              Yang
              KX
            
            
              Feustel
              PJ
            
            
              Mazurkiewicz
              JE
            
          
          The pathogenesis of cardiomyopathy in Friedreich ataxia
          PLoS One
          2015
          10
          e0116396
          10.1371/journal.pone.0116396
          
          25738292
        
      
      
        116.
        
          
            
              Kohyama
              M
            
            
              Ise
              W
            
            
              Edelson
              BT
            
            
              Wilker
              PR
            
            
              Hildner
              K
            
            
              Mejia
              C
            
            
              Frazier
              WA
            
            
              Murphy
              TL
            
            
              Murphy
              KM
            
          
          Role for Spi-C in the development of red pulp macrophages and splenic iron homeostasis
          Nature
          2009
          457
          318
          321
          10.1038/nature07472
          
          19037245
        
      
      
        117.
        
          
            
              Korolnek
              T
            
            
              Hamza
              I
            
          
          Like iron in the blood of the people: the requirement for heme trafficking in iron metabolism
          Front Pharmacol
          2014
          5
          126
          10.3389/fphar.2014.00126
          
          24926267
        
      
      
        118.
        
          
            
              Korolnek
              T
            
            
              Hamza
              I
            
          
          Macrophages and iron trafficking at the birth and death of red cells
          Blood
          2015
          125
          2893
          2897
          10.1182/blood-2014-12-567776
          
          25778532
        
      
      
        119.
        
          
            
              Koskenkorva-Frank
              TS
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
            
              Koppenol
              WH
            
            
              Burckhardt
              S
            
          
          The complex interplay of iron metabolism, reactive oxygen species, and reactive nitrogen species: insights into the potential of various iron therapies to induce oxidative and nitrosative stress
          Free Radic Biol Med
          2013
          65
          1174
          1194
          10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.09.001
          
          24036104
        
      
      
        120.
        
          
            
              Kristiansen
              M
            
            
              Graversen
              JH
            
            
              Jacobsen
              C
            
            
              Sonne
              O
            
            
              Hoffman
              HJ
            
            
              Law
              SK
            
            
              Moestrup
              SK
            
          
          Identification of the haemoglobin scavenger receptor
          Nature
          2001
          409
          198
          201
          10.1038/35051594
          
          11196644
        
      
      
        121.
        
          
            
              Kuhn
              DE
            
            
              Baker
              BD
            
            
              Lafuse
              WP
            
            
              Zwilling
              BS
            
          
          Differential iron transport into phagosomes isolated from the RAW264.7 macrophage cell lines transfected with Nramp1Gly169 or Nramp1Asp169
          J Leukoc Biol
          1999
          66
          113
          119
          
          10410998
        
      
      
        122.
        
          
            
              Kuhn
              DE
            
            
              Lafuse
              WP
            
            
              Zwilling
              BS
            
          
          Iron transport into mycobacterium avium-containing phagosomes from an Nramp1(Gly169)-transfected RAW264.7 macrophage cell line
          J Leukoc Biol
          2001
          69
          43
          49
          
          11200066
        
      
      
        123.
        
          
            
              Kwon
              SJ
            
            
              Lee
              GT
            
            
              Lee
              JH
            
            
              Kim
              WJ
            
            
              Kim
              IY
            
          
          Bone morphogenetic protein-6 induces the expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase in macrophages
          Immunology
          2009
          128
          e758
          e765
          10.1111/j.1365-2567.2009.03079.x
          
          19740337
        
      
      
        124.
        
          
            
              Lambe
              T
            
            
              Simpson
              RJ
            
            
              Dawson
              S
            
            
              Bouriez-Jones
              T
            
            
              Crockford
              TL
            
            
              Lepherd
              M
            
            
              Latunde-Dada
              GO
            
            
              Robinson
              H
            
            
              Raja
              KB
            
            
              Campagna
              DR
            
            
              Villarreal
              G
              Jr
            
            
              Ellory
              JC
            
            
              Goodnow
              CC
            
            
              Fleming
              MD
            
            
              McKie
              AT
            
            
              Cornall
              RJ
            
          
          Identification of a Steap3 endosomal targeting motif essential for normal iron metabolism
          Blood
          2009
          113
          1805
          1808
          10.1182/blood-2007-11-120402
          
          18955558
        
      
      
        125.
        
          
            
              Lavin
              Y
            
            
              Merad
              M
            
          
          Macrophages: gatekeepers of tissue integrity
          Cancer Immunol Res
          2014
          1
          201
          209
          10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-13-0117
        
      
      
        126.
        
          
            
              Lee
              G
            
            
              Lo
              A
            
            
              Short
              SA
            
            
              Mankelow
              TJ
            
            
              Spring
              F
            
            
              Parsons
              SF
            
            
              Yazdanbakhsh
              K
            
            
              Mohandas
              N
            
            
              Anstee
              DJ
            
            
              Chasis
              JA
            
          
          Targeted gene deletion demonstrates that the cell adhesion molecule ICAM-4 is critical for erythroblastic island formation
          Blood
          2006
          108
          2064
          2071
          10.1182/blood-2006-03-006759
          
          16690966
        
      
      
        127.
        
          
            
              Levi
              S
            
            
              Finazzi
              D
            
          
          Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation: update on pathogenic mechanisms
          Front Pharmacol
          2014
          5
          99
          10.3389/fphar.2014.00099
          
          24847269
        
      
      
        128.
        
          
            
              Levy
              JE
            
            
              Jin
              O
            
            
              Fujiwara
              Y
            
            
              Kuo
              F
            
            
              Andrews
              NC
            
          
          Transferrin receptor is necessary for development of erythrocytes and the nervous system
          Nat Genet
          1999
          21
          396
          399
          10.1038/7727
          
          10192390
        
      
      
        129.
        
          
            
              Li
              W
            
            
              Xu
              LH
            
            
              Forssell
              C
            
            
              Sullivan
              JL
            
            
              Yuan
              XM
            
          
          Overexpression of transferrin receptor and ferritin related to clinical symptoms and destabilization of human carotid plaques
          Exp Biol Med (Maywood)
          2008
          233
          818
          826
          10.3181/0711-RM-320
          18445768
        
      
      
        130.
        
          
            
              Li
              JY
            
            
              Paragas
              N
            
            
              Ned
              RM
            
            
              Qiu
              A
            
            
              Viltard
              M
            
            
              Leete
              T
            
            
              Drexler
              IR
            
            
              Chen
              X
            
            
              Sanna-Cherchi
              S
            
            
              Mohammed
              F
            
            
              Williams
              D
            
            
              Lin
              CS
            
            
              Schmidt-Ott
              KM
            
            
              Andrews
              NC
            
            
              Barasch
              J
            
          
          Scara5 is a ferritin receptor mediating non-transferrin iron delivery
          Dev Cell
          2009
          16
          35
          46
          10.1016/j.devcel.2008.12.002
          
          19154717
        
      
      
        131.
        
          
            
              Li
              Q
            
            
              Fu
              W
            
            
              Yao
              J
            
            
              Ji
              Z
            
            
              Wang
              Y
            
            
              Zhou
              Z
            
            
              Yan
              J
            
            
              Li
              W
            
          
          Heme induces IL-1beta secretion through activating NLRP3 in kidney inflammation
          Cell Biochem Biophys
          2014
          69
          495
          502
          10.1007/s12013-014-9823-9
          
          24464629
        
      
      
        132.
        
          
            
              Li
              T
            
            
              Eheim
              AL
            
            
              Klein
              S
            
            
              Uschner
              FE
            
            
              Smith
              AC
            
            
              Brandon-Warner
              E
            
            
              Ghosh
              S
            
            
              Bonkovsky
              HL
            
            
              Trebicka
              J
            
            
              Schrum
              LW
            
          
          Novel role of nuclear receptor Rev-erbalpha in hepatic stellate cell activation: potential therapeutic target for liver injury
          Hepatology
          2014
          59
          2383
          2396
          10.1002/hep.27049
          
          24497272
        
      
      
        133.
        
          
            
              Lin
              SH
            
            
              Song
              W
            
            
              Cressatti
              M
            
            
              Zukor
              H
            
            
              Wang
              E
            
            
              Schipper
              HM
            
          
          Heme oxygenase-1 modulates microRNA expression in cultured astroglia: implications for chronic brain disorders
          Glia
          2015
          63
          1270
          1284
          10.1002/glia.22823
          
          25820186
        
      
      
        134.
        
          
            
              Liu
              Z
            
            
              Ciocea
              A
            
            
              Devireddy
              L
            
          
          Endogenous siderophore 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid deficiency promotes anemia and splenic iron overload in mice
          Mol Cell Biol
          2014
          34
          2533
          2546
          10.1128/MCB.00231-14
          
          24777603
        
      
      
        135.
        
          
            
              Liu
              Z
            
            
              Reba
              S
            
            
              Chen
              WD
            
            
              Porwal
              SK
            
            
              Boom
              WH
            
            
              Petersen
              RB
            
            
              Rojas
              R
            
            
              Viswanathan
              R
            
            
              Devireddy
              L
            
          
          Regulation of mammalian siderophore 2,5-DHBA in the innate immune response to infection
          J Exp Med
          2014
          211
          1197
          1213
          10.1084/jem.20132629
          
          24863067
        
      
      
        136.
        Lok HC, Sahni S, Jansson PJ, Kovacevic Z, Hawkins CL, Richardson DR (2016) A nitric oxide storage and transport system that protects activated macrophages from endogenous nitric oxide cytotoxicity. J Biol Chem 291:27042–27061
      
      
        137.
        
          
            
              Lou
              DQ
            
            
              Lesbordes
              JC
            
            
              Nicolas
              G
            
            
              Viatte
              L
            
            
              Bennoun
              M
            
            
              Van Rooijen
              N
            
            
              Kahn
              A
            
            
              Renia
              L
            
            
              Vaulont
              S
            
          
          Iron- and inflammation-induced hepcidin gene expression in mice is not mediated by Kupffer cells in vivo
          Hepatology
          2005
          41
          1056
          1064
          10.1002/hep.20663
          
          15793843
        
      
      
        138.
        
          
            
              Ludwiczek
              S
            
            
              Aigner
              E
            
            
              Theurl
              I
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          Cytokine-mediated regulation of iron transport in human monocytic cells
          Blood
          2003
          101
          4148
          4154
          10.1182/blood-2002-08-2459
          
          12522003
        
      
      
        139.
        
          
            
              Ludwiczek
              S
            
            
              Theurl
              I
            
            
              Muckenthaler
              MU
            
            
              Jakab
              M
            
            
              Mair
              SM
            
            
              Theurl
              M
            
            
              Kiss
              J
            
            
              Paulmichl
              M
            
            
              Hentze
              MW
            
            
              Ritter
              M
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          Ca2+ channel blockers reverse iron overload by a new mechanism via divalent metal transporter-1
          Nat Med
          2007
          13
          448
          454
          10.1038/nm1542
          
          17293870
        
      
      
        140.
        
          
            
              Luscieti
              S
            
            
              Santambrogio
              P
            
            
              Langlois d'Estaintot
              B
            
            
              Granier
              T
            
            
              Cozzi
              A
            
            
              Poli
              M
            
            
              Gallois
              B
            
            
              Finazzi
              D
            
            
              Cattaneo
              A
            
            
              Levi
              S
            
            
              Arosio
              P
            
          
          Mutant ferritin L-chains that cause neurodegeneration act in a dominant-negative manner to reduce ferritin iron incorporation
          J Biol Chem
          2010
          285
          11948
          11957
          10.1074/jbc.M109.096404
          
          20159981
        
      
      
        141.
        
          
            
              Macedo
              MF
            
            
              de Sousa
              M
            
            
              Ned
              RM
            
            
              Mascarenhas
              C
            
            
              Andrews
              NC
            
            
              Correia-Neves
              M
            
          
          Transferrin is required for early T-cell differentiation
          Immunology
          2004
          112
          543
          549
          10.1111/j.1365-2567.2004.01915.x
          
          15270724
        
      
      
        142.
        
          
            
              Mahnke
              A
            
            
              Meier
              RJ
            
            
              Schatz
              V
            
            
              Hofmann
              J
            
            
              Castiglione
              K
            
            
              Schleicher
              U
            
            
              Wolfbeis
              OS
            
            
              Bogdan
              C
            
            
              Jantsch
              J
            
          
          Hypoxia in Leishmania major skin lesions impairs the NO-dependent leishmanicidal activity of macrophages
          J Invest Dermatol
          2014
          134
          2339
          2346
          10.1038/jid.2014.121
          
          24583949
        
      
      
        143.
        
          
            
              Mair
              SM
            
            
              Nairz
              M
            
            
              Bellmann-Weiler
              R
            
            
              Muehlbacher
              T
            
            
              Schroll
              A
            
            
              Theurl
              I
            
            
              Moser
              PL
            
            
              Talasz
              H
            
            
              Fang
              FC
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          Nifedipine affects the course of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium infection by modulating macrophage iron homeostasis
          J Infect Dis
          2011
          204
          685
          694
          10.1093/infdis/jir395
          
          21844295
        
      
      
        144.
        
          
            
              Marques
              L
            
            
              Negre-Salvayre
              A
            
            
              Costa
              L
            
            
              Canonne-Hergaux
              F
            
          
          Iron gene expression profile in atherogenic Mox macrophages
          Biochim Biophys Acta
          2016
          1862
          1137
          1146
          10.1016/j.bbadis.2016.03.004
          
          26972048
        
      
      
        145.
        
          
            
              Marro
              S
            
            
              Chiabrando
              D
            
            
              Messana
              E
            
            
              Stolte
              J
            
            
              Turco
              E
            
            
              Tolosano
              E
            
            
              Muckenthaler
              MU
            
          
          Heme controls ferroportin1 (FPN1) transcription involving Bach1, Nrf2 and a MARE/ARE sequence motif at position -7007 of the FPN1 promoter
          Haematologica
          2010
          95
          1261
          1268
          10.3324/haematol.2009.020123
          
          20179090
        
      
      
        146.
        Martins R, Maier J, Gorki AD, Huber KV, Sharif O, Starkl P, Saluzzo S, Quattrone F, Gawish R, Lakovits K, Aichinger MC, Radic-Sarikas B, Lardeau CH, Hladik A, Korosec A, Brown M, Vaahtomeri K, Duggan M, Kerjaschki D, Esterbauer H, Colinge J, Eisenbarth SC, Decker T, Bennett KL, Kubicek S, Sixt M, Superti-Furga G, Knapp S (2016) Heme drives hemolysis-induced susceptibility to infection via disruption of phagocyte functions. Nat Immunol
      
      
        147.
        
          
            
              Mathieu
              JR
            
            
              Heinis
              M
            
            
              Zumerle
              S
            
            
              Delga
              S
            
            
              Le Bon
              A
            
            
              Peyssonnaux
              C
            
          
          Investigating the real role of HIF-1 and HIF-2 in iron recycling by macrophages
          Haematologica
          2014
          99
          e112
          e114
          10.3324/haematol.2013.102319
          
          24727819
        
      
      
        148.
        
          
            
              Mayr
              R
            
            
              Janecke
              AR
            
            
              Schranz
              M
            
            
              Griffiths
              WJ
            
            
              Vogel
              W
            
            
              Pietrangelo
              A
            
            
              Zoller
              H
            
          
          Ferroportin disease: a systematic meta-analysis of clinical and molecular findings
          J Hepatol
          2010
          53
          941
          949
          10.1016/j.jhep.2010.05.016
          
          20691492
        
      
      
        149.
        
          
            
              Mayr
              R
            
            
              Griffiths
              WJ
            
            
              Hermann
              M
            
            
              McFarlane
              I
            
            
              Halsall
              DJ
            
            
              Finkenstedt
              A
            
            
              Douds
              A
            
            
              Davies
              SE
            
            
              Janecke
              AR
            
            
              Vogel
              W
            
            
              Cox
              TM
            
            
              Zoller
              H
            
          
          Identification of mutations in SLC40A1 that affect ferroportin function and phenotype of human ferroportin iron overload
          Gastroenterology
          2011
          140
          2056–2063
          e2051
        
      
      
        150.
        
          
            
              McKie
              AT
            
            
              Barlow
              DJ
            
          
          The SLC40 basolateral iron transporter family (IREG1/ferroportin/MTP1)
          Pflugers Arch
          2004
          447
          801
          806
          10.1007/s00424-003-1102-3
          
          12836025
        
      
      
        151.
        
          
            
              McKie
              AT
            
            
              Marciani
              P
            
            
              Rolfs
              A
            
            
              Brennan
              K
            
            
              Wehr
              K
            
            
              Barrow
              D
            
            
              Miret
              S
            
            
              Bomford
              A
            
            
              Peters
              TJ
            
            
              Farzaneh
              F
            
            
              Hediger
              MA
            
            
              Hentze
              MW
            
            
              Simpson
              RJ
            
          
          A novel duodenal iron-regulated transporter, IREG1, implicated in the basolateral transfer of iron to the circulation
          Mol Cell
          2000
          5
          299
          309
          10.1016/S1097-2765(00)80425-6
          
          10882071
        
      
      
        152.
        
          
            
              McKie
              AT
            
            
              Barrow
              D
            
            
              Latunde-Dada
              GO
            
            
              Rolfs
              A
            
            
              Sager
              G
            
            
              Mudaly
              E
            
            
              Mudaly
              M
            
            
              Richardson
              C
            
            
              Barlow
              D
            
            
              Bomford
              A
            
            
              Peters
              TJ
            
            
              Raja
              KB
            
            
              Shirali
              S
            
            
              Hediger
              MA
            
            
              Farzaneh
              F
            
            
              Simpson
              RJ
            
          
          An iron-regulated ferric reductase associated with the absorption of dietary iron
          Science
          2001
          291
          1755
          1759
          10.1126/science.1057206
          
          11230685
        
      
      
        153.
        
          
            
              Melillo
              G
            
            
              Taylor
              LS
            
            
              Brooks
              A
            
            
              Musso
              T
            
            
              Cox
              GW
            
            
              Varesio
              L
            
          
          Functional requirement of the hypoxia-responsive element in the activation of the inducible nitric oxide synthase promoter by the iron chelator desferrioxamine
          J Biol Chem
          1997
          272
          12236
          12243
          10.1074/jbc.272.18.12236
          
          9115299
        
      
      
        154.
        
          
            
              Mitterstiller
              AM
            
            
              Haschka
              D
            
            
              Dichtl
              S
            
            
              Nairz
              M
            
            
              Demetz
              E
            
            
              Talasz
              H
            
            
              Soares
              MP
            
            
              Einwallner
              E
            
            
              Esterbauer
              H
            
            
              Fang
              FC
            
            
              Geley
              S
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          Heme oxygenase 1 controls early innate immune response of macrophages to Salmonella typhimurium infection
          Cell Microbiol
          2016
          18
          1374
          1389
          10.1111/cmi.12578
          
          26866925
        
      
      
        155.
        
          
            
              Miyanishi
              M
            
            
              Tada
              K
            
            
              Koike
              M
            
            
              Uchiyama
              Y
            
            
              Kitamura
              T
            
            
              Nagata
              S
            
          
          Identification of Tim4 as a phosphatidylserine receptor
          Nature
          2007
          450
          435
          439
          10.1038/nature06307
          
          17960135
        
      
      
        156.
        
          
            
              Moestrup
              SK
            
            
              Moller
              HJ
            
          
          CD163: a regulated hemoglobin scavenger receptor with a role in the anti-inflammatory response
          Ann Med
          2004
          36
          347
          354
          10.1080/07853890410033171
          
          15478309
        
      
      
        157.
        
          
            
              Montosi
              G
            
            
              Corradini
              E
            
            
              Garuti
              C
            
            
              Barelli
              S
            
            
              Recalcati
              S
            
            
              Cairo
              G
            
            
              Valli
              L
            
            
              Pignatti
              E
            
            
              Vecchi
              C
            
            
              Ferrara
              F
            
            
              Pietrangelo
              A
            
          
          Kupffer cells and macrophages are not required for hepatic hepcidin activation during iron overload
          Hepatology
          2005
          41
          545
          552
          10.1002/hep.20620
          
          15726660
        
      
      
        158.
        
          
            
              Moretti
              D
            
            
              Goede
              JS
            
            
              Zeder
              C
            
            
              Jiskra
              M
            
            
              Chatzinakou
              V
            
            
              Tjalsma
              H
            
            
              Melse-Boonstra
              A
            
            
              Brittenham
              G
            
            
              Swinkels
              DW
            
            
              Zimmermann
              MB
            
          
          Oral iron supplements increase hepcidin and decrease iron absorption from daily or twice-daily doses in iron-depleted young women
          Blood
          2015
          126
          1981
          1989
          10.1182/blood-2015-05-642223
          
          26289639
        
      
      
        159.
        
          
            
              Muckenthaler
              M
            
            
              Roy
              CN
            
            
              Custodio
              AO
            
            
              Minana
              B
            
            
              deGraaf
              J
            
            
              Montross
              LK
            
            
              Andrews
              NC
            
            
              Hentze
              MW
            
          
          Regulatory defects in liver and intestine implicate abnormal hepcidin and Cybrd1 expression in mouse hemochromatosis
          Nat Genet
          2003
          34
          102
          107
          10.1038/ng1152
          
          12704390
        
      
      
        160.
        
          
            
              Muhoberac
              BB
            
            
              Baraibar
              MA
            
            
              Vidal
              R
            
          
          Iron loading-induced aggregation and reduction of iron incorporation in heteropolymeric ferritin containing a mutant light chain that causes neurodegeneration
          Biochim Biophys Acta
          2013
          1812
          544
          548
          10.1016/j.bbadis.2010.10.010
        
      
      
        161.
        
          
            
              Nahrendorf
              M
            
            
              Swirski
              FK
            
          
          Innate immune cells in ischaemic heart disease: does myocardial infarction beget myocardial infarction?
          Eur Heart J
          2016
          37
          868
          872
          10.1093/eurheartj/ehv453
          
          26351395
        
      
      
        162.
        
          
            
              Nairz
              M
            
            
              Fritsche
              G
            
            
              Brunner
              P
            
            
              Talasz
              H
            
            
              Hantke
              K
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          Interferon-gamma limits the availability of iron for intramacrophage Salmonella typhimurium
          Eur J Immunol
          2008
          38
          1923
          1936
          10.1002/eji.200738056
          
          18581323
        
      
      
        163.
        
          
            
              Nairz
              M
            
            
              Fritsche
              G
            
            
              Crouch
              ML
            
            
              Barton
              HC
            
            
              Fang
              FC
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          Slc11a1 limits intracellular growth of Salmonella enterica sv. Typhimurium by promoting macrophage immune effector functions and impairing bacterial iron acquisition
          Cell Microbiol
          2009
          11
          1365
          1381
          10.1111/j.1462-5822.2009.01337.x
          
          19500110
        
      
      
        164.
        
          
            
              Nairz
              M
            
            
              Schleicher
              U
            
            
              Schroll
              A
            
            
              Sonnweber
              T
            
            
              Theurl
              I
            
            
              Ludwiczek
              S
            
            
              Talasz
              H
            
            
              Brandacher
              G
            
            
              Moser
              PL
            
            
              Muckenthaler
              MU
            
            
              Fang
              FC
            
            
              Bogdan
              C
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          Nitric oxide-mediated regulation of ferroportin-1 controls macrophage iron homeostasis and immune function in Salmonella infection
          J Exp Med
          2013
          210
          855
          873
          10.1084/jem.20121946
          
          23630227
        
      
      
        165.
        
          
            
              Nairz
              M
            
            
              Haschka
              D
            
            
              Demetz
              E
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          Iron at the interface of immunity and infection
          Front Pharmacol
          2014
          5
          152
          10.3389/fphar.2014.00152
          
          25076907
        
      
      
        166.
        
          
            
              Nairz
              M
            
            
              Ferring-Appel
              D
            
            
              Casarrubea
              D
            
            
              Sonnweber
              T
            
            
              Viatte
              L
            
            
              Schroll
              A
            
            
              Haschka
              D
            
            
              Fang
              FC
            
            
              Hentze
              MW
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
            
              Galy
              B
            
          
          Iron regulatory proteins mediate host resistance to salmonella infection
          Cell Host Microbe
          2015
          18
          254
          261
          10.1016/j.chom.2015.06.017
          
          26190773
        
      
      
        167.
        
          
            
              Nairz
              M
            
            
              Schroll
              A
            
            
              Demetz
              E
            
            
              Tancevski
              I
            
            
              Theurl
              I
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          'Ride on the ferrous wheel'—the cycle of iron in macrophages in health and disease
          Immunobiology
          2015
          220
          280
          294
          10.1016/j.imbio.2014.09.010
          
          25240631
        
      
      
        168.
        
          
            
              Nairz
              M
            
            
              Theurl
              I
            
            
              Wolf
              D
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          Iron deficiency or anemia of inflammation?: differential diagnosis and mechanisms of anemia of inflammation
          Wien Med Wochenschr
          2016
          166
          411
          423
          10.1007/s10354-016-0505-7
          
          27557596
        
      
      
        169.
        
          
            
              Nandar
              W
            
            
              Neely
              EB
            
            
              Unger
              E
            
            
              Connor
              JR
            
          
          A mutation in the HFE gene is associated with altered brain iron profiles and increased oxidative stress in mice
          Biochim Biophys Acta
          2013
          1832
          729
          741
          10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.02.009
          
          23429074
        
      
      
        170.
        
          
            
              Nell-Duxneuner
              V
            
            
              Axmann
              R
            
            
              Husar-Memmer
              E
            
            
              Dallos
              T
            
            
              Datz
              C
            
            
              Stadlmayr
              A
            
            
              Aigner
              E
            
            
              Englbrecht
              M
            
            
              Schett
              G
            
            
              Zwerina
              J
            
          
          VCAM-1 serum levels are associated with arthropathy in hereditary haemochromatosis
          Ann Rheum Dis
          2013
          72
          2006
          2010
          10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-202800
          
          23599437
        
      
      
        171.
        
          
            
              Nemeth
              E
            
            
              Ganz
              T
            
          
          Regulation of iron metabolism by hepcidin
          Annu Rev Nutr
          2006
          26
          323
          342
          10.1146/annurev.nutr.26.061505.111303
          
          16848710
        
      
      
        172.
        
          
            
              Nemeth
              E
            
            
              Rivera
              S
            
            
              Gabayan
              V
            
            
              Keller
              C
            
            
              Taudorf
              S
            
            
              Pedersen
              BK
            
            
              Ganz
              T
            
          
          IL-6 mediates hypoferremia of inflammation by inducing the synthesis of the iron regulatory hormone hepcidin
          J Clin Invest
          2004
          113
          1271
          1276
          10.1172/JCI200420945
          
          15124018
        
      
      
        173.
        
          
            
              Nemeth
              E
            
            
              Tuttle
              MS
            
            
              Powelson
              J
            
            
              Vaughn
              MB
            
            
              Donovan
              A
            
            
              Ward
              DM
            
            
              Ganz
              T
            
            
              Kaplan
              J
            
          
          Hepcidin regulates cellular iron efflux by binding to ferroportin and inducing its internalization
          Science
          2004
          306
          2090
          2093
          10.1126/science.1104742
          
          15514116
        
      
      
        174.
        
          
            
              Nicolas
              G
            
            
              Bennoun
              M
            
            
              Devaux
              I
            
            
              Beaumont
              C
            
            
              Grandchamp
              B
            
            
              Kahn
              A
            
            
              Vaulont
              S
            
          
          Lack of hepcidin gene expression and severe tissue iron overload in upstream stimulatory factor 2 (USF2) knockout mice
          Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
          2001
          98
          8780
          8785
          10.1073/pnas.151179498
          
          11447267
        
      
      
        175.
        
          
            
              Oexle
              H
            
            
              Gnaiger
              E
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          Iron-dependent changes in cellular energy metabolism: influence on citric acid cycle and oxidative phosphorylation
          Biochim Biophys Acta
          1999
          1413
          99
          107
          10.1016/S0005-2728(99)00088-2
          
          10556622
        
      
      
        176.
        
          
            
              Oexle
              H
            
            
              Kaser
              A
            
            
              Most
              J
            
            
              Bellmann-Weiler
              R
            
            
              Werner
              ER
            
            
              Werner-Felmayer
              G
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          Pathways for the regulation of interferon-gamma-inducible genes by iron in human monocytic cells
          J Leukoc Biol
          2003
          74
          287
          294
          10.1189/jlb.0802420
          
          12885946
        
      
      
        177.
        
          
            
              Ohgami
              RS
            
            
              Campagna
              DR
            
            
              Greer
              EL
            
            
              Antiochos
              B
            
            
              McDonald
              A
            
            
              Chen
              J
            
            
              Sharp
              JJ
            
            
              Fujiwara
              Y
            
            
              Barker
              JE
            
            
              Fleming
              MD
            
          
          Identification of a ferrireductase required for efficient transferrin-dependent iron uptake in erythroid cells
          Nat Genet
          2005
          37
          1264
          1269
          10.1038/ng1658
          
          16227996
        
      
      
        178.
        
          
            
              Olsson
              M
            
            
              Oldenborg
              PA
            
          
          CD47 on experimentally senescent murine RBCs inhibits phagocytosis following Fcgamma receptor-mediated but not scavenger receptor-mediated recognition by macrophages
          Blood
          2008
          112
          4259
          4267
          10.1182/blood-2008-03-143008
          
          18779391
        
      
      
        179.
        
          
            
              Pantopoulos
              K
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
            
              Hentze
              MW
            
          
          Nitric oxide and oxidative stress (H2O2) control mammalian iron metabolism by different pathways
          Mol Cell Biol
          1996
          16
          3781
          3788
          10.1128/MCB.16.7.3781
          
          8668195
        
      
      
        180.
        
          
            
              Pantopoulos
              K
            
            
              Porwal
              SK
            
            
              Tartakoff
              A
            
            
              Devireddy
              L
            
          
          Mechanisms of mammalian iron homeostasis
          Biochemistry
          2012
          51
          5705
          5724
          10.1021/bi300752r
          
          22703180
        
      
      
        181.
        
          
            
              Part
              K
            
            
              Kunnis-Beres
              K
            
            
              Poska
              H
            
            
              Land
              T
            
            
              Shimmo
              R
            
            
              Zetterstrom Fernaeus
              S
            
          
          Amyloid beta25-35 induced ROS-burst through NADPH oxidase is sensitive to iron chelation in microglial Bv2 cells
          Brain Res
          2015
          1629
          282
          290
          10.1016/j.brainres.2015.09.034
          
          26505916
        
      
      
        182.
        
          
            
              Pechlaner
              R
            
            
              Kiechl
              S
            
            
              Mayr
              M
            
            
              Santer
              P
            
            
              Weger
              S
            
            
              Haschka
              D
            
            
              Bansal
              SS
            
            
              Willeit
              J
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          Correlates of serum hepcidin levels and its association with cardiovascular disease in an elderly general population
          Clin Chem Lab Med
          2016
          54
          151
          161
          10.1515/cclm-2015-0068
          
          26124055
        
      
      
        183.
        
          
            
              Penno
              E
            
            
              Johnsson
              C
            
            
              Johansson
              L
            
            
              Ahlstrom
              H
            
          
          Macrophage uptake of ultra-small iron oxide particles for magnetic resonance imaging in experimental acute cardiac transplant rejection
          Acta Radiol
          2006
          47
          264
          271
          10.1080/02841850500539041
          
          16613307
        
      
      
        184.
        
          
            
              Petters
              C
            
            
              Thiel
              K
            
            
              Dringen
              R
            
          
          Lysosomal iron liberation is responsible for the vulnerability of brain microglial cells to iron oxide nanoparticles: comparison with neurons and astrocytes
          Nanotoxicology
          2015
          10
          332
          342
          10.3109/17435390.2015.1071445
          
          26287375
        
      
      
        185.
        
          
            
              Peyssonnaux
              C
            
            
              Zinkernagel
              AS
            
            
              Datta
              V
            
            
              Lauth
              X
            
            
              Johnson
              RS
            
            
              Nizet
              V
            
          
          TLR4-dependent hepcidin expression by myeloid cells in response to bacterial pathogens
          Blood
          2006
          107
          3727
          3732
          10.1182/blood-2005-06-2259
          
          16391018
        
      
      
        186.
        
          
            
              Pham
              CG
            
            
              Bubici
              C
            
            
              Zazzeroni
              F
            
            
              Papa
              S
            
            
              Jones
              J
            
            
              Alvarez
              K
            
            
              Jayawardena
              S
            
            
              De Smaele
              E
            
            
              Cong
              R
            
            
              Beaumont
              C
            
            
              Torti
              FM
            
            
              Torti
              SV
            
            
              Franzoso
              G
            
          
          Ferritin heavy chain upregulation by NF-kappaB inhibits TNFalpha-induced apoptosis by suppressing reactive oxygen species
          Cell
          2004
          119
          529
          542
          10.1016/j.cell.2004.10.017
          
          15537542
        
      
      
        187.
        
          
            
              Phelan
              CA
            
            
              Gampe
              RT
              Jr
            
            
              Lambert
              MH
            
            
              Parks
              DJ
            
            
              Montana
              V
            
            
              Bynum
              J
            
            
              Broderick
              TM
            
            
              Hu
              X
            
            
              Williams
              SP
            
            
              Nolte
              RT
            
            
              Lazar
              MA
            
          
          Structure of Rev-erbalpha bound to N-CoR reveals a unique mechanism of nuclear receptor-co-repressor interaction
          Nat Struct Mol Biol
          2010
          17
          808
          814
          10.1038/nsmb.1860
          
          20581824
        
      
      
        188.
        
          
            
              Pietrangelo
              A
            
          
          Hemochromatosis: an endocrine liver disease
          Hepatology
          2007
          46
          1291
          1301
          10.1002/hep.21886
          
          17886335
        
      
      
        189.
        
          
            
              Pietrangelo
              A
            
          
          Hereditary hemochromatosis: pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment
          Gastroenterology
          2010
          139
          393
          408
          10.1053/j.gastro.2010.06.013
          
          20542038
        
      
      
        190.
        
          
            
              Pietsch
              EC
            
            
              Chan
              JY
            
            
              Torti
              FM
            
            
              Torti
              SV
            
          
          Nrf2 mediates the induction of ferritin H in response to xenobiotics and cancer chemopreventive dithiolethiones
          J Biol Chem
          2003
          278
          2361
          2369
          10.1074/jbc.M210664200
          
          12435735
        
      
      
        191.
        
          
            
              Qian
              ZM
            
            
              He
              X
            
            
              Liang
              T
            
            
              Wu
              KC
            
            
              Yan
              YC
            
            
              Lu
              LN
            
            
              Yang
              G
            
            
              Luo
              QQ
            
            
              Yung
              WH
            
            
              Ke
              Y
            
          
          Lipopolysaccharides upregulate hepcidin in neuron via microglia and the IL-6/STAT3 signaling pathway
          Mol Neurobiol
          2014
          50
          811
          820
          10.1007/s12035-014-8671-3
          
          24659348
        
      
      
        192.
        
          
            
              Ramos
              P
            
            
              Casu
              C
            
            
              Gardenghi
              S
            
            
              Breda
              L
            
            
              Crielaard
              BJ
            
            
              Guy
              E
            
            
              Marongiu
              MF
            
            
              Gupta
              R
            
            
              Levine
              RL
            
            
              Abdel-Wahab
              O
            
            
              Ebert
              BL
            
            
              Van Rooijen
              N
            
            
              Ghaffari
              S
            
            
              Grady
              RW
            
            
              Giardina
              PJ
            
            
              Rivella
              S
            
          
          Macrophages support pathological erythropoiesis in polycythemia vera and beta-thalassemia
          Nat Med
          2013
          19
          437
          445
          10.1038/nm.3126
          
          23502961
        
      
      
        193.
        
          
            
              Recalcati
              S
            
            
              Alberghini
              A
            
            
              Campanella
              A
            
            
              Gianelli
              U
            
            
              De Camilli
              E
            
            
              Conte
              D
            
            
              Cairo
              G
            
          
          Iron regulatory proteins 1 and 2 in human monocytes, macrophages and duodenum: expression and regulation in hereditary hemochromatosis and iron deficiency
          Haematologica
          2006
          91
          303
          310
          
          16503547
        
      
      
        194.
        
          
            
              Roetto
              A
            
            
              Papanikolaou
              G
            
            
              Politou
              M
            
            
              Alberti
              F
            
            
              Girelli
              D
            
            
              Christakis
              J
            
            
              Loukopoulos
              D
            
            
              Camaschella
              C
            
          
          Mutant antimicrobial peptide hepcidin is associated with severe juvenile hemochromatosis
          Nat Genet
          2003
          33
          21
          22
          10.1038/ng1053
          
          12469120
        
      
      
        195.
        
          
            
              Rouault
              TA
            
          
          The role of iron regulatory proteins in mammalian iron homeostasis and disease
          Nat Chem Biol
          2006
          2
          406
          414
          10.1038/nchembio807
          
          16850017
        
      
      
        196.
        
          
            
              Rouault
              TA
            
          
          Iron metabolism in the CNS: implications for neurodegenerative diseases
          Nat Rev Neurosci
          2013
          14
          551
          564
          10.1038/nrn3453
          
          23820773
        
      
      
        197.
        
          
            
              Rucker
              P
            
            
              Torti
              FM
            
            
              Torti
              SV
            
          
          Role of H and L subunits in mouse ferritin
          J Biol Chem
          1996
          271
          33352
          33357
          10.1074/jbc.271.52.33352
          
          8969195
        
      
      
        198.
        
          
            
              Saeed
              O
            
            
              Otsuka
              F
            
            
              Polavarapu
              R
            
            
              Karmali
              V
            
            
              Weiss
              D
            
            
              Davis
              T
            
            
              Rostad
              B
            
            
              Pachura
              K
            
            
              Adams
              L
            
            
              Elliott
              J
            
            
              Taylor
              WR
            
            
              Narula
              J
            
            
              Kolodgie
              F
            
            
              Virmani
              R
            
            
              Hong
              CC
            
            
              Finn
              AV
            
          
          Pharmacological suppression of hepcidin increases macrophage cholesterol efflux and reduces foam cell formation and atherosclerosis
          Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
          2012
          32
          299
          307
          10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.240101
          
          22095982
        
      
      
        199.
        
          
            
              Sager
              HB
            
            
              Hulsmans
              M
            
            
              Lavine
              KJ
            
            
              Moreira
              MB
            
            
              Heidt
              T
            
            
              Courties
              G
            
            
              Sun
              Y
            
            
              Iwamoto
              Y
            
            
              Tricot
              B
            
            
              Khan
              OF
            
            
              Dahlman
              JE
            
            
              Borodovsky
              A
            
            
              Fitzgerald
              K
            
            
              Anderson
              DG
            
            
              Weissleder
              R
            
            
              Libby
              P
            
            
              Swirski
              FK
            
            
              Nahrendorf
              M
            
          
          Proliferation and recruitment contribute to myocardial macrophage expansion in chronic heart failure
          Circ Res
          2016
          119
          853
          864
          10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.309001
          
          27444755
        
      
      
        200.
        
          
            
              Sarkar
              J
            
            
              Seshadri
              V
            
            
              Tripoulas
              NA
            
            
              Ketterer
              ME
            
            
              Fox
              PL
            
          
          Role of ceruloplasmin in macrophage iron efflux during hypoxia
          J Biol Chem
          2003
          278
          44018
          44024
          10.1074/jbc.M304926200
          
          12952974
        
      
      
        201.
        
          
            
              Schaer
              CA
            
            
              Schoedon
              G
            
            
              Imhof
              A
            
            
              Kurrer
              MO
            
            
              Schaer
              DJ
            
          
          Constitutive endocytosis of CD163 mediates hemoglobin-heme uptake and determines the noninflammatory and protective transcriptional response of macrophages to hemoglobin
          Circ Res
          2006
          99
          943
          950
          10.1161/01.RES.0000247067.34173.1b
          
          17008602
        
      
      
        202.
        
          
            
              Schaer
              DJ
            
            
              Vinchi
              F
            
            
              Ingoglia
              G
            
            
              Tolosano
              E
            
            
              Buehler
              PW
            
          
          Haptoglobin, hemopexin, and related defense pathways-basic science, clinical perspectives, and drug development
          Front Physiol
          2014
          5
          415
          10.3389/fphys.2014.00415
          
          25389409
        
      
      
        203.
        
          
            
              Schaer
              CA
            
            
              Deuel
              JW
            
            
              Schildknecht
              D
            
            
              Mahmoudi
              L
            
            
              Garcia-Rubio
              I
            
            
              Owczarek
              C
            
            
              Schauer
              S
            
            
              Kissner
              R
            
            
              Banerjee
              U
            
            
              Palmer
              AF
            
            
              Spahn
              DR
            
            
              Irwin
              DC
            
            
              Vallelian
              F
            
            
              Buehler
              PW
            
            
              Schaer
              DJ
            
          
          Haptoglobin preserves vascular nitric oxide signaling during hemolysis
          Am J Respir Crit Care Med
          2016
          193
          1111
          1122
          10.1164/rccm.201510-2058OC
          
          26694989
        
      
      
        204.
        
          
            
              Schipper
              HM
            
          
          Glial HO-1 expression, iron deposition and oxidative stress in neurodegenerative diseases
          Neurotox Res
          1999
          1
          57
          70
          10.1007/BF03033339
          
          12835114
        
      
      
        205.
        
          
            
              Schleicher
              U
            
            
              Paduch
              K
            
            
              Debus
              A
            
            
              Obermeyer
              S
            
            
              Konig
              T
            
            
              Kling
              JC
            
            
              Ribechini
              E
            
            
              Dudziak
              D
            
            
              Mougiakakos
              D
            
            
              Murray
              PJ
            
            
              Ostuni
              R
            
            
              Korner
              H
            
            
              Bogdan
              C
            
          
          TNF-mediated restriction of arginase 1 expression in myeloid cells triggers type 2 NO synthase activity at the site of infection
          Cell Rep
          2016
          15
          1062
          1075
          10.1016/j.celrep.2016.04.001
          
          27117406
        
      
      
        206.
        
          
            
              Schroll
              A
            
            
              Eller
              K
            
            
              Feistritzer
              C
            
            
              Nairz
              M
            
            
              Sonnweber
              T
            
            
              Moser
              PA
            
            
              Rosenkranz
              AR
            
            
              Theurl
              I
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          Lipocalin-2 ameliorates granulocyte functionality
          Eur J Immunol
          2012
          42
          3346
          3357
          10.1002/eji.201142351
          
          22965758
        
      
      
        207.
        
          
            
              Scott
              CL
            
            
              Zheng
              F
            
            
              De Baetselier
              P
            
            
              Martens
              L
            
            
              Saeys
              Y
            
            
              De Prijck
              S
            
            
              Lippens
              S
            
            
              Abels
              C
            
            
              Schoonooghe
              S
            
            
              Raes
              G
            
            
              Devoogdt
              N
            
            
              Lambrecht
              BN
            
            
              Beschin
              A
            
            
              Guilliams
              M
            
          
          Bone marrow-derived monocytes give rise to self-renewing and fully differentiated Kupffer cells
          Nat Commun
          2016
          7
          10321
          10.1038/ncomms10321
          
          26813785
        
      
      
        208.
        
          
            
              Sender
              R
            
            
              Fuchs
              S
            
            
              Milo
              R
            
          
          Revised estimates for the number of human and bacteria cells in the body
          PLoS Biol
          2016
          14
          e1002533
          10.1371/journal.pbio.1002533
          
          27541692
        
      
      
        209.
        
          
            
              Siegert
              I
            
            
              Schodel
              J
            
            
              Nairz
              M
            
            
              Schatz
              V
            
            
              Dettmer
              K
            
            
              Dick
              C
            
            
              Kalucka
              J
            
            
              Franke
              K
            
            
              Ehrenschwender
              M
            
            
              Schley
              G
            
            
              Beneke
              A
            
            
              Sutter
              J
            
            
              Moll
              M
            
            
              Hellerbrand
              C
            
            
              Wielockx
              B
            
            
              Katschinski
              DM
            
            
              Lang
              R
            
            
              Galy
              B
            
            
              Hentze
              MW
            
            
              Koivunen
              P
            
            
              Oefner
              PJ
            
            
              Bogdan
              C
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
            
              Willam
              C
            
            
              Jantsch
              J
            
          
          Ferritin-mediated iron sequestration stabilizes hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha upon LPS activation in the presence of ample oxygen
          Cell Rep
          2015
          13
          2048
          2055
          10.1016/j.celrep.2015.11.005
          
          26628374
        
      
      
        210.
        
          
            
              Smith
              KD
            
          
          Iron metabolism at the host pathogen interface: lipocalin 2 and the pathogen-associated iroA gene cluster
          Int J Biochem Cell Biol
          2007
          39
          1776
          1780
          10.1016/j.biocel.2007.07.003
          
          17714976
        
      
      
        211.
        
          
            
              Soares
              MP
            
            
              Hamza
              I
            
          
          Macrophages and iron metabolism
          Immunity
          2016
          44
          492
          504
          10.1016/j.immuni.2016.02.016
          
          26982356
        
      
      
        212.
        
          
            
              Soares
              MP
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          The iron age of host-microbe interactions
          EMBO Rep
          2015
          16
          1482
          1500
          10.15252/embr.201540558
          
          26474900
        
      
      
        213.
        
          
            
              Soe-Lin
              S
            
            
              Apte
              SS
            
            
              Andriopoulos
              B
              Jr
            
            
              Andrews
              MC
            
            
              Schranzhofer
              M
            
            
              Kahawita
              T
            
            
              Garcia-Santos
              D
            
            
              Ponka
              P
            
          
          Nramp1 promotes efficient macrophage recycling of iron following erythrophagocytosis in vivo
          Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
          2009
          106
          5960
          5965
          10.1073/pnas.0900808106
          
          19321419
        
      
      
        214.
        
          
            
              Sohn
              YS
            
            
              Ghoti
              H
            
            
              Breuer
              W
            
            
              Rachmilewitz
              E
            
            
              Attar
              S
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
            
              Cabantchik
              ZI
            
          
          The role of endocytic pathways in cellular uptake of plasma non-transferrin iron
          Haematologica
          2012
          97
          670
          678
          10.3324/haematol.2011.054858
          
          22180428
        
      
      
        215.
        
          
            
              Song
              W
            
            
              Su
              H
            
            
              Song
              S
            
            
              Paudel
              HK
            
            
              Schipper
              HM
            
          
          Over-expression of heme oxygenase-1 promotes oxidative mitochondrial damage in rat astroglia
          J Cell Physiol
          2006
          206
          655
          663
          10.1002/jcp.20509
          
          16222706
        
      
      
        216.
        
          
            
              Song
              L
            
            
              Song
              W
            
            
              Schipper
              HM
            
          
          Astroglia overexpressing heme oxygenase-1 predispose co-cultured PC12 cells to oxidative injury
          J Neurosci Res
          2007
          85
          2186
          2195
          10.1002/jnr.21367
          
          17526019
        
      
      
        217.
        
          
            
              Song
              D
            
            
              Song
              Y
            
            
              Hadziahmetovic
              M
            
            
              Zhong
              Y
            
            
              Dunaief
              JL
            
          
          Systemic administration of the iron chelator deferiprone protects against light-induced photoreceptor degeneration in the mouse retina
          Free Radic Biol Med
          2012
          53
          64
          71
          10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.04.020
          
          22579919
        
      
      
        218.
        
          
            
              Song
              W
            
            
              Zukor
              H
            
            
              Lin
              SH
            
            
              Liberman
              A
            
            
              Tavitian
              A
            
            
              Mui
              J
            
            
              Vali
              H
            
            
              Fillebeen
              C
            
            
              Pantopoulos
              K
            
            
              Wu
              TD
            
            
              Guerquin-Kern
              JL
            
            
              Schipper
              HM
            
          
          Unregulated brain iron deposition in transgenic mice over-expressing HMOX1 in the astrocytic compartment
          J Neurochem
          2012
          123
          325
          336
          10.1111/j.1471-4159.2012.07914.x
          
          22881289
        
      
      
        219.
        
          
            
              Stober
              CB
            
            
              Brode
              S
            
            
              White
              JK
            
            
              Popoff
              JF
            
            
              Blackwell
              JM
            
          
          Slc11a1, formerly Nramp1, is expressed in dendritic cells and influences major histocompatibility complex class II expression and antigen-presenting cell function
          Infect Immun
          2007
          75
          5059
          5067
          10.1128/IAI.00153-07
          
          17620357
        
      
      
        220.
        
          
            
              Sullivan
              JL
            
          
          Iron in arterial plaque: modifiable risk factor for atherosclerosis
          Biochim Biophys Acta
          2009
          1790
          718
          723
          10.1016/j.bbagen.2008.06.005
          
          18619522
        
      
      
        221.
        
          
            
              Sun
              J
            
            
              Hoshino
              H
            
            
              Takaku
              K
            
            
              Nakajima
              O
            
            
              Muto
              A
            
            
              Suzuki
              H
            
            
              Tashiro
              S
            
            
              Takahashi
              S
            
            
              Shibahara
              S
            
            
              Alam
              J
            
            
              Taketo
              MM
            
            
              Yamamoto
              M
            
            
              Igarashi
              K
            
          
          Hemoprotein Bach1 regulates enhancer availability of heme oxygenase-1 gene
          EMBO J
          2002
          21
          5216
          5224
          10.1093/emboj/cdf516
          
          12356737
        
      
      
        222.
        
          
            
              Sun
              YM
            
            
              Wang
              YT
            
            
              Jiang
              L
            
            
              Xue
              MZ
            
          
          The effects of deferoxamine on inhibition for microglia activation and protection of secondary nerve injury after intracerebral hemorrhage in rats
          Pak J Pharm Sci
          2016
          29
          1087
          1093
          
          27383488
        
      
      
        223.
        
          
            
              Swirski
              FK
            
            
              Nahrendorf
              M
            
          
          Leukocyte behavior in atherosclerosis, myocardial infarction, and heart failure
          Science
          2013
          339
          161
          166
          10.1126/science.1230719
          
          23307733
        
      
      
        224.
        
          
            
              Tacchini
              L
            
            
              Gammella
              E
            
            
              De Ponti
              C
            
            
              Recalcati
              S
            
            
              Cairo
              G
            
          
          Role of HIF-1 and NF-kappaB transcription factors in the modulation of transferrin receptor by inflammatory and anti-inflammatory signals
          J Biol Chem
          2008
          283
          20674
          20686
          10.1074/jbc.M800365200
          
          18519569
        
      
      
        225.
        
          
            
              Techau
              ME
            
            
              Valdez-Taubas
              J
            
            
              Popoff
              JF
            
            
              Francis
              R
            
            
              Seaman
              M
            
            
              Blackwell
              JM
            
          
          Evolution of differences in transport function in Slc11a family members
          J Biol Chem
          2007
          282
          35646
          35656
          10.1074/jbc.M707057200
          
          17932044
        
      
      
        226.
        
          
            
              Theurl
              I
            
            
              Fritsche
              G
            
            
              Ludwiczek
              S
            
            
              Garimorth
              K
            
            
              Bellmann-Weiler
              R
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          The macrophage: a cellular factory at the interphase between iron and immunity for the control of infections
          Biometals
          2005
          18
          359
          367
          10.1007/s10534-005-3710-1
          
          16158228
        
      
      
        227.
        
          
            
              Theurl
              I
            
            
              Theurl
              M
            
            
              Seifert
              M
            
            
              Mair
              S
            
            
              Nairz
              M
            
            
              Rumpold
              H
            
            
              Zoller
              H
            
            
              Bellmann-Weiler
              R
            
            
              Niederegger
              H
            
            
              Talasz
              H
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          Autocrine formation of hepcidin induces iron retention in human monocytes
          Blood
          2008
          111
          2392
          2399
          10.1182/blood-2007-05-090019
          
          18073346
        
      
      
        228.
        
          
            
              Theurl
              M
            
            
              Theurl
              I
            
            
              Hochegger
              K
            
            
              Obrist
              P
            
            
              Subramaniam
              N
            
            
              van Rooijen
              N
            
            
              Schuemann
              K
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          Kupffer cells modulate iron homeostasis in mice via regulation of hepcidin expression
          J Mol Med (Berl)
          2008
          86
          825
          835
          10.1007/s00109-008-0346-y
          18521557
        
      
      
        229.
        
          
            
              Theurl
              I
            
            
              Aigner
              E
            
            
              Theurl
              M
            
            
              Nairz
              M
            
            
              Seifert
              M
            
            
              Schroll
              A
            
            
              Sonnweber
              T
            
            
              Eberwein
              L
            
            
              Witcher
              DR
            
            
              Murphy
              AT
            
            
              Wroblewski
              VJ
            
            
              Wurz
              E
            
            
              Datz
              C
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          Regulation of iron homeostasis in anemia of chronic disease and iron deficiency anemia: diagnostic and therapeutic implications
          Blood
          2009
          113
          5277
          5286
          10.1182/blood-2008-12-195651
          
          19293425
        
      
      
        230.
        
          
            
              Theurl
              I
            
            
              Schroll
              A
            
            
              Sonnweber
              T
            
            
              Nairz
              M
            
            
              Theurl
              M
            
            
              Willenbacher
              W
            
            
              Eller
              K
            
            
              Wolf
              D
            
            
              Seifert
              M
            
            
              Sun
              CC
            
            
              Babitt
              JL
            
            
              Hong
              CC
            
            
              Menhall
              T
            
            
              Gearing
              P
            
            
              Lin
              HY
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          Pharmacologic inhibition of hepcidin expression reverses anemia of chronic inflammation in rats
          Blood
          2011
          118
          4977
          4984
          10.1182/blood-2011-03-345066
          
          21730356
        
      
      
        231.
        
          
            
              Theurl
              I
            
            
              Hilgendorf
              I
            
            
              Nairz
              M
            
            
              Tymoszuk
              P
            
            
              Haschka
              D
            
            
              Asshoff
              M
            
            
              He
              S
            
            
              Gerhardt
              LM
            
            
              Holderried
              TA
            
            
              Seifert
              M
            
            
              Sopper
              S
            
            
              Fenn
              AM
            
            
              Anzai
              A
            
            
              Rattik
              S
            
            
              McAlpine
              C
            
            
              Theurl
              M
            
            
              Wieghofer
              P
            
            
              Iwamoto
              Y
            
            
              Weber
              GF
            
            
              Harder
              NK
            
            
              Chousterman
              BG
            
            
              Arvedson
              TL
            
            
              McKee
              M
            
            
              Wang
              F
            
            
              Lutz
              OM
            
            
              Rezoagli
              E
            
            
              Babitt
              JL
            
            
              Berra
              L
            
            
              Prinz
              M
            
            
              Nahrendorf
              M
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
            
              Weissleder
              R
            
            
              Lin
              HY
            
            
              Swirski
              FK
            
          
          On-demand erythrocyte disposal and iron recycling requires transient macrophages in the liver
          Nat Med
          2016
          22
          945
          951
          10.1038/nm.4146
          
          27428900
        
      
      
        232.
        
          
            
              Theurl
              M
            
            
              Song
              D
            
            
              Clark
              E
            
            
              Sterling
              J
            
            
              Grieco
              S
            
            
              Altamura
              S
            
            
              Galy
              B
            
            
              Hentze
              M
            
            
              Muckenthaler
              MU
            
            
              Dunaief
              JL
            
          
          Mice with hepcidin-resistant ferroportin accumulate iron in the retina
          FASEB J
          2016
          30
          813
          823
          10.1096/fj.15-276758
          
          26506980
        
      
      
        233.
        
          
            
              Thomsen
              MS
            
            
              Andersen
              MV
            
            
              Christoffersen
              PR
            
            
              Jensen
              MD
            
            
              Lichota
              J
            
            
              Moos
              T
            
          
          Neurodegeneration with inflammation is accompanied by accumulation of iron and ferritin in microglia and neurons
          Neurobiol Dis
          2015
          81
          108
          118
          10.1016/j.nbd.2015.03.013
          
          25801802
        
      
      
        234.
        
          
            
              Toda
              S
            
            
              Segawa
              K
            
            
              Nagata
              S
            
          
          MerTK-mediated engulfment of pyrenocytes by central macrophages in erythroblastic islands
          Blood
          2014
          123
          3963
          3971
          10.1182/blood-2014-01-547976
          
          24659633
        
      
      
        235.
        
          
            
              Tolosano
              E
            
            
              Fagoonee
              S
            
            
              Hirsch
              E
            
            
              Berger
              FG
            
            
              Baumann
              H
            
            
              Silengo
              L
            
            
              Altruda
              F
            
          
          Enhanced splenomegaly and severe liver inflammation in haptoglobin/hemopexin double-null mice after acute hemolysis
          Blood
          2002
          100
          4201
          4208
          10.1182/blood-2002-04-1270
          
          12393471
        
      
      
        236.
        
          
            
              Torti
              FM
            
            
              Torti
              SV
            
          
          Regulation of ferritin genes and protein
          Blood
          2002
          99
          3505
          3516
          10.1182/blood.V99.10.3505
          
          11986201
        
      
      
        237.
        
          
            
              Turrini
              F
            
            
              Mannu
              F
            
            
              Cappadoro
              M
            
            
              Ulliers
              D
            
            
              Giribaldi
              G
            
            
              Arese
              P
            
          
          Binding of naturally occurring antibodies to oxidatively and nonoxidatively modified erythrocyte band 3
          Biochim Biophys Acta
          1994
          1190
          297
          303
          10.1016/0005-2736(94)90087-6
          
          8142429
        
      
      
        238.
        
          
            
              Valenti
              L
            
            
              Dongiovanni
              P
            
            
              Motta
              BM
            
            
              Swinkels
              DW
            
            
              Bonara
              P
            
            
              Rametta
              R
            
            
              Burdick
              L
            
            
              Frugoni
              C
            
            
              Fracanzani
              AL
            
            
              Fargion
              S
            
          
          Serum hepcidin and macrophage iron correlate with MCP-1 release and vascular damage in patients with metabolic syndrome alterations
          Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
          2010
          31
          683
          690
          10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.214858
          
          21183736
        
      
      
        239.
        
          
            
              Vanoaica
              L
            
            
              Darshan
              D
            
            
              Richman
              L
            
            
              Schumann
              K
            
            
              Kuhn
              LC
            
          
          Intestinal ferritin H is required for an accurate control of iron absorption
          Cell Metab
          2010
          12
          273
          282
          10.1016/j.cmet.2010.08.003
          
          20816093
        
      
      
        240.
        
          
            
              Vargas
              MR
            
            
              Pehar
              M
            
            
              Cassina
              P
            
            
              Martinez-Palma
              L
            
            
              Thompson
              JA
            
            
              Beckman
              JS
            
            
              Barbeito
              L
            
          
          Fibroblast growth factor-1 induces heme oxygenase-1 via nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) in spinal cord astrocytes: consequences for motor neuron survival
          J Biol Chem
          2005
          280
          25571
          25579
          10.1074/jbc.M501920200
          
          15870071
        
      
      
        241.
        
          
            
              Vinchi
              F
            
            
              Costa da Silva
              M
            
            
              Ingoglia
              G
            
            
              Petrillo
              S
            
            
              Brinkman
              N
            
            
              Zuercher
              A
            
            
              Cerwenka
              A
            
            
              Tolosano
              E
            
            
              Muckenthaler
              MU
            
          
          Hemopexin therapy reverts heme-induced proinflammatory phenotypic switching of macrophages in a mouse model of sickle cell disease
          Blood
          2016
          127
          473
          486
          10.1182/blood-2015-08-663245
          
          26675351
        
      
      
        242.
        
          
            
              Wang
              J
            
            
              Pantopoulos
              K
            
          
          Regulation of cellular iron metabolism
          Biochem J
          2011
          434
          365
          381
          10.1042/BJ20101825
          
          21348856
        
      
      
        243.
        
          
            
              Wang
              J
            
            
              Chen
              G
            
            
              Lee
              J
            
            
              Pantopoulos
              K
            
          
          Iron-dependent degradation of IRP2 requires its C-terminal region and IRP structural integrity
          BMC Mol Biol
          2008
          9
          15
          10.1186/1471-2199-9-15
          
          18226225
        
      
      
        244.
        
          
            
              Warkentin
              DL
            
            
              Marchand
              A
            
            
              Van Lente
              F
            
          
          Serum haptoglobin concentrations in concurrent hemolysis and acute-phase reaction
          Clin Chem
          1987
          33
          1265
          1266
          
          3109782
        
      
      
        245.
        
          
            
              Weinberg
              ED
            
          
          Iron availability and infection
          Biochim Biophys Acta
          2009
          1790
          600
          605
          10.1016/j.bbagen.2008.07.002
          
          18675317
        
      
      
        246.
        
          
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          Genetic mechanisms and modifying factors in hereditary hemochromatosis
          Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol
          2010
          7
          50
          58
          10.1038/nrgastro.2009.201
          
          19918260
        
      
      
        247.
        
          
            
              Weiss
              G
            
            
              Schaible
              UE
            
          
          Macrophage defense mechanisms against intracellular bacteria
          Immunol Rev
          2015
          264
          182
          203
          10.1111/imr.12266
          
          25703560
        
      
      
        248.
        
          
            
              Wessling-Resnick
              M
            
          
          Iron imports. III. Transfer of iron from the mucosa into circulation
          Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol
          2006
          290
          G1
          G6
          10.1152/ajpgi.00415.2005
          
          16354771
        
      
      
        249.
        
          
            
              Wessling-Resnick
              M
            
          
          Nramp1 and other transporters involved in metal withholding during infection
          J Biol Chem
          2015
          290
          18984
          18990
          10.1074/jbc.R115.643973
          
          26055722
        
      
      
        250.
        
          
            
              White
              C
            
            
              Yuan
              X
            
            
              Schmidt
              PJ
            
            
              Bresciani
              E
            
            
              Samuel
              TK
            
            
              Campagna
              D
            
            
              Hall
              C
            
            
              Bishop
              K
            
            
              Calicchio
              ML
            
            
              Lapierre
              A
            
            
              Ward
              DM
            
            
              Liu
              P
            
            
              Fleming
              MD
            
            
              Hamza
              I
            
          
          HRG1 is essential for heme transport from the phagolysosome of macrophages during erythrophagocytosis
          Cell Metab
          2013
          17
          261
          270
          10.1016/j.cmet.2013.01.005
          
          23395172
        
      
      
        251.
        
          
            
              Willekens
              FL
            
            
              Werre
              JM
            
            
              Kruijt
              JK
            
            
              Roerdinkholder-Stoelwinder
              B
            
            
              Groenen-Dopp
              YA
            
            
              van den Bos
              AG
            
            
              Bosman
              GJ
            
            
              van Berkel
              TJ
            
          
          Liver Kupffer cells rapidly remove red blood cell-derived vesicles from the circulation by scavenger receptors
          Blood
          2005
          105
          2141
          2145
          10.1182/blood-2004-04-1578
          
          15550489
        
      
      
        252.
        
          
            
              Xiao
              X
            
            
              Yeoh
              BS
            
            
              Saha
              P
            
            
              Tian
              Y
            
            
              Singh
              V
            
            
              Patterson
              AD
            
            
              Vijay-Kumar
              M
            
          
          Modulation of urinary siderophores by the diet, gut microbiota and inflammation in mice
          J Nutr Biochem
          2016
          41
          25
          33
          10.1016/j.jnutbio.2016.11.014
          
          27951517
        
      
      
        253.
        
          
            
              Yi
              T
            
            
              Li
              J
            
            
              Chen
              H
            
            
              Wu
              J
            
            
              An
              J
            
            
              Xu
              Y
            
            
              Hu
              Y
            
            
              Lowell
              CA
            
            
              Cyster
              JG
            
          
          Splenic dendritic cells survey red blood cells for missing self-CD47 to trigger adaptive immune responses
          Immunity
          2015
          43
          764
          775
          10.1016/j.immuni.2015.08.021
          
          26453377
        
      
      
        254.
        
          
            
              Yoshida
              H
            
            
              Kawane
              K
            
            
              Koike
              M
            
            
              Mori
              Y
            
            
              Uchiyama
              Y
            
            
              Nagata
              S
            
          
          Phosphatidylserine-dependent engulfment by macrophages of nuclei from erythroid precursor cells
          Nature
          2005
          437
          754
          758
          10.1038/nature03964
          
          16193055
        
      
      
        255.
        
          
            
              Yu
              X
            
            
              Song
              N
            
            
              Guo
              X
            
            
              Jiang
              H
            
            
              Zhang
              H
            
            
              Xie
              J
            
          
          Differences in vulnerability of neurons and astrocytes to heme oxygenase-1 modulation: implications for mitochondrial ferritin
          Sci Rep
          2016
          6
          24200
          10.1038/srep24200
          
          27097841
        
      
      
        256.
        
          
            
              Yuan
              XM
            
          
          Apoptotic macrophage-derived foam cells of human atheromas are rich in iron and ferritin, suggesting iron-catalysed reactions to be involved in apoptosis
          Free Radic Res
          1999
          30
          221
          231
          10.1080/10715769900300241
          
          10711792
        
      
      
        257.
        
          
            
              Zanganeh
              S
            
            
              Hutter
              G
            
            
              Spitler
              R
            
            
              Lenkov
              O
            
            
              Mahmoudi
              M
            
            
              Shaw
              A
            
            
              Pajarinen
              JS
            
            
              Nejadnik
              H
            
            
              Goodman
              S
            
            
              Moseley
              M
            
            
              Coussens
              LM
            
            
              Daldrup-Link
              HE
            
          
          Iron oxide nanoparticles inhibit tumour growth by inducing pro-inflammatory macrophage polarization in tumour tissues
          Nat Nanotechnol
          2016
          11
          986
          994
          10.1038/nnano.2016.168
          
          27668795
        
      
      
        258.
        
          
            
              Zeineh
              MM
            
            
              Chen
              Y
            
            
              Kitzler
              HH
            
            
              Hammond
              R
            
            
              Vogel
              H
            
            
              Rutt
              BK
            
          
          Activated iron-containing microglia in the human hippocampus identified by magnetic resonance imaging in Alzheimer disease
          Neurobiol Aging
          2015
          36
          2483
          2500
          10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.05.022
          
          26190634
        
      
      
        259.
        
          
            
              Zhang
              Z
            
            
              Zhang
              F
            
            
              An
              P
            
            
              Guo
              X
            
            
              Shen
              Y
            
            
              Tao
              Y
            
            
              Wu
              Q
            
            
              Zhang
              Y
            
            
              Yu
              Y
            
            
              Ning
              B
            
            
              Nie
              G
            
            
              Knutson
              MD
            
            
              Anderson
              GJ
            
            
              Wang
              F
            
          
          Ferroportin1 deficiency in mouse macrophages impairs iron homeostasis and inflammatory responses
          Blood
          2011
          118
          1912
          1922
          10.1182/blood-2011-01-330324
          
          21705499
        
      
      
        260.
        Zhang Z, Song Y, Li D, Zhu H, Liang R, Gu Y, Pang Y, Qi J, Wu H, Wang J (2017) Distinct role of heme oxygenase-1 in early- and late-stage intracerebral hemorrhage in 12-month-old mice. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 37:25–38
      
      
        261.
        
          
            
              Zhao
              L
            
            
              Li
              Y
            
            
              Song
              D
            
            
              Song
              Y
            
            
              Theurl
              M
            
            
              Wang
              C
            
            
              Cwanger
              A
            
            
              Su
              G
            
            
              Dunaief
              JL
            
          
          A high serum iron level causes mouse retinal iron accumulation despite an intact blood-retinal barrier
          Am J Pathol
          2014
          184
          2862
          2867
          10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.07.008
          
          25174877
        
      
      
        262.
        
          
            
              Zhou
              J
            
            
              Ye
              S
            
            
              Fujiwara
              T
            
            
              Manolagas
              SC
            
            
              Zhao
              H
            
          
          Steap4 plays a critical role in osteoclastogenesis in vitro by regulating cellular iron/reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels and cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) activation
          J Biol Chem
          2013
          288
          30064
          30074
          10.1074/jbc.M113.478750
          
          23990467
        
      
      
        263.
        
          
            
              Zohn
              IE
            
            
              De Domenico
              I
            
            
              Pollock
              A
            
            
              Ward
              DM
            
            
              Goodman
              JF
            
            
              Liang
              X
            
            
              Sanchez
              AJ
            
            
              Niswander
              L
            
            
              Kaplan
              J
            
          
          The flatiron mutation in mouse ferroportin acts as a dominant negative to cause ferroportin disease
          Blood
          2007
          109
          4174
          4180
          10.1182/blood-2007-01-066068
          
          17289807
        
      
      
        264.
        
          
            
              Zoller
              H
            
            
              Theurl
              I
            
            
              Koch
              RO
            
            
              McKie
              AT
            
            
              Vogel
              W
            
            
              Weiss
              G
            
          
          Duodenal cytochrome b and hephaestin expression in patients with iron deficiency and hemochromatosis
          Gastroenterology
          2003
          125
          746
          754
          10.1016/S0016-5085(03)01063-1
          
          12949720
        
      
    
  
